When I was sick with a head cold, my headfull of pressure, my father would soak a washclothin hot water, then ball it up, ring it out. He wouldopen it above my head, then place it againstmy face like a second skin, the light around medisappearing entirely except through the spacesbetween the stitching. I would inhale the steamin that darkness, hearing his voice on the other side,otherwise almost devoid of any other bodily sensebut the warmth and depth of his voice, as ifI had already died and was on the other sideof life waiting for the sickness to lift, but I wasnt.I was still on this earth, the washcloth going coldon my face, my body still sick, and my father stillthere when I opened my eyes, as he always was,there to give me warmth before going cold again.;
Even in dreams, your father is working,and in the version youd been having for weeks,he lifts a large replica of the world, places iton his back, and because his body here defieslogic and physics, carries it up a hill, which,after you wake up, you know is a metaphorfor twelve-hour shifts, for pounding nailsinto wood, for sliding steel into slots againand again, and for the days when his backis shaped into a crooked punctuation,and his feet, marking the floor into a hieroglyph,have lost more of their purpose, becoming quietwhen he gets home, so that all you see of himis not comparisons to language, but twoswollen limbs, a body reclined on a La-Z-Boy,a father relieved to call this silence his own.;
Thisis your cupthe cup assigned to youFrom the beginning. Nay, my child, I knowHow much of that dark drink is your own brewOf fault and passion. Ages long agoIn the deep years of yesterday,I knew.This is your roada painful road and drear.I made the stonesthat never give you rest I set your friend in pleasant ways and clear,And he shall come, like you, unto my breast But youmy weary child!must travel here.This is your task. It has no joy nor grace.But is not meant for any other hand,And in my universe hath measured place.Take it  I do not bid you understand I bid you close your eyesto see my face.;
 ?;
I celebrate myselfAnd what I assume you shall assume,For every atom belonging to me as good belongs to youI loafe and invite my soul,I lean and loafe at my ease...observing a spear of summer grass.Walt Whitman, Leaves of GrassI celebrate myselfAnd what I hereby cede you shall hereby cede,For the country relinquished by me as good is relinquished by youI loafe and convey to the United StatesAll the right, title and interest...in my country, occupied and claimed,I give and grieve...meeting on spears of summer grassI celebrate myselfAnd what I hold in reserve for my exclusive right and occupationShall be available from time to time      to the President, at his discretion, to be surveyed into lotsI acknowledge my dependence and promise to be friendlyI pledge and agree...not to shelter or conceal offenders       but to deliver them up to the authorities for trialI celebrate my miyxatWho bore losses that we would not bear,For nnim waqswit that is nnim titoqanwit       knkuI hold and cherish Article IIII protect and love our usual and accustomed places, our exclusive right       to take fish, to hunt, to gather roots and berries,       and pasture our horses on open landI celebrate nnim wtes, our land:Ka nnim wtes hwes nnim wtes knkuAnd our land is our land foreverI love and enlarge my soulensetwse inim titqan, wax nnim wtes  timpnise WailatpuI love my people, and our land  I remember the Place of Rye GrassWe are one with our landAnd our land is our ancestors land, alwaysAll the land they are lighting, the land is shining brightforevernn wisx kustte nnim wteska nnim wtes hwes nnim anoqnmanm wtes, knkuhilakwisix lamna wtesne, wtes hilakwisaknku;
                              red rock giants                            holy in another life                               gawked at in                              hot pink jeeps                             for $30 an hour.                                         \\                                           \\       25 to peer       into the eyes of the mountain              \\           through a       rusted   looking    glass.                \\                                               \\    tourists stumble                                \\over themselves to see theirfaces in the forefront                                  \\        (and ours:        the background).                              \\                                                     5,000 men strong                                             we watched as our brothers                                                     lost their footing to                                              10,000 white intruders.                                                   they now call it                                                        Soldier Pass.                                                     after the                                                   ensanguined hand                                                   of General Crook.;
Needles in skilled handspulled through cloth or skinmove of their owngilded volition.      Taaniwe laakwa?In Shawnee,you ask      where in timeas opposed to whenand it helps me      consider folds of territorytilled by memory and capacitywhere the ones I tender      bloom quietly and eternally.A strain of heirloom cornroughly translates to the wordsustainerworldsthat germinate inside such a word wild horses, lilting shadows,glimpsed in the elbows of the hills      like opaque flags of prayer.My distant kin in Neoshofolded deep indigo beansinto the palm of my handand said try them      where you stay.Within the words of a blessingin my husbands languageI recognize through repetition      The word for city.      The word for garden.Like an heirloom seed,I was sown and cultivated      back from the brink.To rise within      a place in time,hands sortedhundreds of seeds medicine and sustenancepallid disks of immunosuppressants      and steroids.      Flint corn from the Scioto Valley.All those momentsI shook too hard      to do it myself.Running a fingeracross the slight backsof trade beads: cornflower blue,      grassgreen, the white-heart red            a fire-flood of sunset.I feel the shadowof my aunts beadingwringing my neck and wrists.Spells to protect      my casing gates.Cerrillos turquoise      threaded into my earlobes.Intricate blueprintsto the homelandskept my toesfrom the sky ladders      sapphire rungs.Sustainers are all around:songs chantedseven states awayglistening exhalationsof devotion and sacrifice,      migrations of breath.Adorn the skin with glass.In a place in timethe ground warms and opensthe hour is right,      stitch a seed and it sustains.;
the antelopes rib cage, a bridge of bones at the base of the anthill          you are outside your fathers house that is outside the city that isoutside the country where a bullet dislodges an infants bonethe            owls are learning about the dunes of night, the terrain is full ofwidowed birds searching the bark of trees for holesboys your age                   are somewhere afar, before a river waiting to lick themof their saltthe throes mothers carry in the place you are from      are remembered by the number of boys who fell off their backs beforethey named thembefore the dark, the sun is setting the sky on        firepink flames burning the clouds, a bird is crashing, the stormcoming carries the face of the people in your dreams where the          antelope elopes with a bullet inside its brainwhere your motheris singing a song the color of wanethe storm is coming & it is        bringing the dark with itdust comes before the road is forgottenbefore the green of august ashes into brown in novemberthe smell of rain whets your noseas you walk inside the house, hope swallows you.;
He shot birds down in that field across the road from his house.That old man would take his shotgun,and he would unleash his dog,let her run after the falling remains of what was once a life.He assures me he isnt like other bird killers,he uses every part.A house adorned with fine feathers and mystery jerky tucked away in theback of a freezer.His dog, I named her.Beauty.I didnt teach her to kill.He was the one that told her to bite down when it wriggled on the ground.He taught her to sit when he opened the sliding door,and I was stuck on the concrete deck with her.My hands brushed over her filth like it was my own.I became one and the same with that dog.Ten years pass,and I come back to find that a now older,more aggressivedog welcomes me back into her world without hesitation.That same dog that bit down on the necks of birds and could run with truckslets me run her a bubble bath.The big native man,heavy artillery at his side,watches from the deck as his pup jumps at the hose in my hands.She rolls in the grass, lunging with no malice,and covers my hips in suds and dirt.We are one and the same.My mother tells me to ask about it,but I cant bring myself to.I already know part of the answer.He had eleven siblings.Later on in life, a wife and four children, two dogs.All in the small houses they juggled between.He needed his time alone.I dont think he ever really liked the aspect of killing.But he still sat out in the middle of nowhere,covered in bug spray and leaking of camo cloth,waiting for a deer to cross his path.I dont know how other people hunt,but my grandfather would sit in one place and wait.He must have learned how to fish first.When I was eight he took me fishing for the first time.Beauty was about a year old.That old dock reminded me of a fantasy movie.So I abandoned my pink rod and lay down, letting my hand brush the water.He tried to read to me,but he lost his voice,and I lost my ability to do anything but daydream.I wasnt allowed to be a kid most of the time.We were juggling houses and breaking boundaries the same way he had.But he taught me to daydream.Just like he taught that dog to bite,he taught me to take care of myself.If Beauty ever ran away, she would be able to live on her own.She was capable.My grandfather had lived with other people his whole life I think he was scared of forgetting who he was amidst them all.He didnt like killing,though he did love the jerky he didnt go out in the afternoon looking for birds.;
near butterfly mountainlived a medicine person  from the mountain  i come to know myselfhe told me  from the mountain  my name was given to me  butterfly man  is how i am known  some men  laugh at my name  but that doesnt bother me    my grandmother told me    never laugh at others    because the future is unknown    queer people are sacred    we must always rememberTranslated by the author from the Navajo;

Her all-night melody blusheslike directions for new lovers      who are lost.Last night all she held was a hum      that ran away.She now stretches words in our broken-down carsomewhere on Valley Viewbetween Orphaned Lane       and the dead end,about hidden roads and streetsof homes for all the abandoned.I study the map when she falls from crescendo.Flashlight held by my teeth,her voice needsboth hands to trace.She leads me down paths disappearinginto blue lines holding      imaginary rivers,blacking in thin creasesand folds or contoured lines.She drones about the water. I find the blue again.My hand pressed against                        the faded shore.;
After Jenean Hornbuckles painting, Creation, oil on canvas, NMAI 26.2876A bit packed                    up here,                                    isnt it? Lets make the earth.The beetles body shows the world                                in ways words cant.The water ripples                                in ways water cant.     In the animals bodywe find ourselves.                                    In the land, well,thats to be decided, ah eh?Theres a terror in the spread of Dayunisis limbs,     in his strange face.If I didnt know any better, Id think those contortions     were a symbol of fear, or confusion.Hes moving north, and surrounded      (t)here, at the National Museum of the American Indian. We stopto stare at our own making.It gets lighter as you look up,                                the blue moving north, too, from dark to                                 light.;
After Edgar Heap of Birds, Ocmulgee (2005)You came    You came     fromYou came from your homes Your family    Yourrivers   creeks                           camewith you in your blood     in your songsthe hawks    flew    inside the wings of your     voiceyour voice    walked like a      deer      across theland  your land    was a   voice walking        deepin your bloods wings         to the place  awaitingits own birth     what is born is also made        and whatis made is earned       built         like historya house          mound       hall anything we walk intoa state      perhaps     a state of being      a state stillmired in its own making  making the dead    the deada trail        a walk of bones      a song of singing skinthat lives through its dying       who has not lived with your death?Who has not lived?       You          in the dust of your hundreddeaths       your thousandsyour deaths are the constitutionof this country       this country         this    stateof the union               we say to your deaths that they are oursthey are hours       days        years        only now lived intoa legacy      we are learning now to live into your legacy learningwhat has a state learned?    What has a death driven us to?Let us pray to your walking  Let us walk backward to your prayersIf you are a song let us sing you    Let the dead live        into the state       of our making;
After Gerald Vizenor, with a line from ShakiraAs I nametag through life on took landI send out echolocations of confusionand gratitude to anythingthat can receive itthe big ladderthe little ditchconstellationsmade from shifting satellitesnamed after the children of the wealthyfor birthday presentschairs made for sitting unsat inclouds move if you lookor notthere will be a pointat which boxes will hold everything you own some frog hops into a pondand if youre some combination of good lucky deadyouve got one hell of a hell underneath yourclothes theres an endless story the little ladderthe big ditchwhichever you think is better is better;
I call out for Water Woman, my motherI call out for Earth Woman, my motherI emerge from below the earths surfaceI emerge from within sacred darknessthat cradles my mother Earth Womans heartI emerge at the House-Made-of-ThoughtI emerge at the House-Made-of-LanguageI am homeI am homeTranslated by the author from the Navajo;
Act I:              NyolDah adiigo dkehg deeshwo.Act II:             ChahaheeOnce upon a time, { five-fingered being cold   airsunrise } stepped into a sentence: Nizhngo bi holdoolee. tsoh dihigo yii doonah. They steppedfurther into the words. There is water  eetsaa nmazshee hl. There is a meadow, a winters meadow,gathering in a bright morning.Act III:            DnShndn Hootsoh ayo bitsdindn.Saad adhelgo yiits.Act IV:             ShBhooshaahI stand in the sunwith an empty bowlmeant for a river;
How many sidewalks with hardly a crack                                   stopgrasses in their tracks, how many reefs along wrecks                           stoprecovering once bleached. How many sadnesses indicatetrue north. How many creatures dying back                                 stopfeeding and lie still. Water moving againstits reflection-skin, shifting a beached humpback.                             Stop-signed old avenues exchange heaves. Freezing pointsbreathe and hurricanes crush and those with kickbacks                         stopstopping it. Tornado sirens as light flecks mold-like alongthe sill, as gull spines diamonded through the darks                           stop-per. Who will save the wolf pack or the shark attackfrom the megalomaniac or the smokestack.                                  Stop.Nature was made to be ransacked.                                         Stopthinking of this as a setback.                                             Stopfeeling like this is a rat trap or sidetrack or                                   stop-gap, until everything including Jennifers grows scarceand everyones are buried and the world doesnt feel the lack.                     Stop.Bushwhack back through to common sense.;
I saw the ghost of younestled within your particular,who moved among thousandsof thousands of thousands of thousandsin the way that plainlands of grass hide a witness insideWhen I first learned you existedI was reminded how some of us containan unborn twins tooth in our lining& this your being seemed to me,though now I know you are morea fragment of silica so small as to be particle,bite of white thread,caught in daguerreotype mid-wave,not surrender, but depletion& therefore, an age-old storybut also a kind of long undetectable,arrived from a previous downplunge& now, in ascent, decanting the very earthI have not been taking what is needed(becoming smaller, flatter)I am astonished there is a thing that does only thatdevours& its particular is unharmedLittle monument, you arethe modified & derived, consequent,consequence, forgiveall these words  I am tryingto measure something like hereafterHow you remain& eludelike dirt after rain, a speck of sweet bone,the tumult of root & tangle, ohcleft that is left, inspectedfor form, for secrets, stillat the end, expelledfrom dark & notthe dark;
North East New Territories, Hong Kongfrom the soilWe make our son. From the soil we make our son biscuits. From the soil we make our son biscuits stored in ceramic bowls. From the soil we make our son biscuits stored in ceramic bowls made with the same soil. From the soil we make our son biscuits stored in ceramic bowls made with the same soil we dig, burn, and grind into red dusts. From the soil we make our son biscuits stored in ceramic bowls made with the same soil we dig, burn, grind into red dusts, which means earthly affairs, a dream in an utterance that presupposes us.day tripsYour son tugs at my sleeve, making me get him the red sugar cubes you prepared for our tea. Zest and mint. He knows Im eager to please but you notice. So you push away the red sugar cubes and give him biscuits instead. The biscuits look like tiny pebbles. These are sweet too. Tiny fingers. Tiny bites. He is always eating. The way he abandoned his bread in the bookshelf for play last time we visited. This farm, this house, his birthplace: layered red soil, ghosts, and labor in the bathtub. Sweet when taken in small doses.give and takeTake the mugwort and rub it on your skin. Take the lemongrass spray. The bugs are used to us. We are used to the bugs. They could tell you are new here so they go at you. Take the tomatoes. Its not a harvest, its an explosion from the unbroken rain. I have been eating them, only eating them for a week. Take the white corn. Eat them raw. A burst of sunshine. Take Luk Sum. Take Man Gor. Take Ling Tai. Take Fai Gei. Take Tong San. Take Ling Jie. Take other farmers in mind. Oh, take the last batch of tofu from a friends closing factory, too.strangenessThe potatoes I take home are tiny and firm, except for one. Rinsing the potato, I poke my finger through the mud-filled holes, afraid of any sign of life inside. The mud crumbles into more mud. A hollowed-out starch maze. A sign that the earth does not taste metallic. I often think I could farm, except for the snakes that might slither into village houses, except for finishing the days work before the skin-scathing noon. Sometimes, life stops changing for the smallest of reasons, such as not being able to wake up with the sun.trustOur son was born before dawn. We named him Hei Yeung, hope for the sun. I never quite trusted the hospital. We read and discussed with each other to decide on the bathtub. The what-ifs became shared. Not all of us agreed. The ones who stayed in the farmhouse helped my home birth. We do talk about everything, like the way we share our income: wage or taking from the communal safe when needed? Sometimes we lose friends with the same belief, who want it differently. But I know theyre out there, working.to yieldServesever  ourout: gunshots from unseen barracks puncture the air. Some doors do not open in the village, not just these vintage cars before us but always the fire, always the bulldozer razing the soil before it is taken from your hands. Farmers without farms. The city that could no longer feed itself collapses into your throat. My tears sell better than my crops, eh? Your mind, your body yields to the soil, despitethe day a friends farm shuts down, another celebrates a tiny harvest. Rice stalks bend slightly in giving.;
By the border, my passport sticks to my facelike a kiss,     or a slap.There are women with children who look at me but wont speak,because speaking     means worrying,and our world isnt made of worrying.Its like bathing with cold water on a winter evening, it doesnt matteryoure cold anyway or like loving someone on a hot summer afternoon.They find their way through the border,I find mine, trying not to recognize faces that might know    you.For years now, I might not know myself withoutlooking through my bag I will learn to live with the desperate quiet of the morning sand,and I will remember    your name   but not you.;
I spit up the pillsthat look like pills,place them back insidethe orange safety bottle,place the bottle next tovitamins, aspirin, glue,then hit the backspace keyand deletethe scene nowchroma white and starry.Evening retreatsinto day and the lightdoes not yet hurt.I smile all day longand erase the trance of fireeach time it erupts(delete, delete).Each of my deadholds a torchinside me, bubblingup my throat,lungs gummedwith creosote.I reverse into the earlymorning blankerywhen the pills stillsing me to sleep,deep in the blue milkof oblivion,all of my wicksfor the moment unlit.The laundry in pilesabsent of bodies.Each version of myselfis a day collapsedin a flowered baskethalf fog, half sludge,and twinkling.My chemical sleepordered at the drugstore.My pharmacist, my god,my automatic refill,please, quelland quiet me.I am an ordinary Iunfree from history.;
The best clouds in the business     are right above meright now.Were riding in this teal convertible     those clouds just dozing     in about forty-nine different shapes     white as clean paper,     their edges like feathers against the blue sky,blue as Dads eyes.Dad drives, my sisters in front     I lay my head on Moms lap in the back.     I lay my head on her lap as he drives     this teal convertible that we rented specialjust for these four days in Albuquerque.In it, we are open to the whole world     to the whole sky     and I know right now     I can see     that these arethe best clouds in the business.;
I clung to my grandfathers backlike a beetle on a sesame leafevery time he leapt over chasmsto take me mountain raspberry hunting.He hit trees with a long wooden rodand chestnuts fell from the sky.His palms broke the spindly shieldswhen knives couldnt split the burr.Once, we picked out the prettiest chickenand the strangled squawks bubbledinto the best chicken porridge Ive ever had.A trellis of buzzing fly paper always smackedhis forehead and he never flinched. Tombstonesline the terraced hills next to fields of soybeansand tobacco. Is there no magic from my mouthwhen I say that my grandfather is deadthat I still dont really care? My mouthdressed in fried breadcrumbs, like the fishon the tablea low ah escaping my lipscurling over my teeth to say .;
After Yayoi KusamaAfter FRONTLINEs Rape in the FieldsWe have no work for you, but I can hire your daughters. He would try totouch me.    Those moments accumulate in the interstices of someone elseshistory. Lets go inspect the field. It was dark, but the insects glimmeredas if to    distract. My body followed my hair, pulledtaut into the fields secrecy. There, the almond orchard. We call themfields de calzn,    the  bursting like ripe fruit.She was always ready in a red nightgown. The streams nearby, thevaricose veins    he couldnt describe. Every acre wasnt his to cultivate.Where have you been hiding her? The field blinks. Hums. Ruptures.A confined    darkness punctured with small consolations of light.The field, infinite mirrors at one intersection. My face echoing & echoing.I dont    have an answer for that. Frogs scream for help.    Our faces echo awfully the aggregate.;
Doubt is a storming bull, crashing throughthe blue-wide windows of myself. Here in the heartof my heart where it never stops raining,I am an outsider looking in. But in the gardenof my good days, no body is wrong. Here everyflower grows ragged and sideways and alwaysbeautiful. We bloom with the outcasts,our soon-to-be sunlit, we dreamers. We are strangeand unbelonging. Yes. We are just enoughof ourselves to catch the wind in our feathers,and fly so perfectly away.;
The mothers became targets.Hanging on clotheslines, bibsof the barely fed.Children, countries bornsplit in twofirstbornswhose first steps abortedtheir sisters, brothers, the fresh breadof their love language,children the Englishtearing sphincters in two.The mothers came by boat,with wings, forgettingtheir own mothers uteruses, singingpraises to Allah, they came over and over againuntil it could not matter that so-and-so had died,we were the nicknames escapingtheir bellies, the translation betweenstay and never arrived.Husbands, uncles, we werewives, illnesses, pawpaw seeds,only things that could save them,sickle cells that knew betterthan to touch. Visibleonly in their dialect, they sent for cousins,wired money, forgave ancestorswe couldnt trust.They stopped speaking to usin our birth language until we became newdictionaries, became the consonantsof the Constitution they studied,our first words forgottenartifacts in our homecountries. They were the oneswhose fathers had diedin the milt of language,without daughters.In America, we were memorieswithout accents or consensus,lambs that couldnt be tradedfor milk, meal, or honey,the fact of our bodiesin America their new Quran.And, oh, how they moaned,how they starved, sucking their teethbetween Kings English, yelling for usto stop playing immigrant and goget naturalized.;
Up till now,the math of my lifehas been pretty simple:friendsplus familyplus sports.What morecould I ask for, right?But lately,my outside has been changingand my inside keeps telling memore is on the way.Trouble is,Im not sureIm ready.;
When my dad walksinto a room,or downthe street,he inchesup on mesilentas shadow,and I dont knowhes thereuntil I feelhis hug.Sometimeswhen he isnearI might evenhearhis heart beatbut neverhis quietfeet.;
He has flown headfirst against the glassand now lies stunned on the stone patio,nothing moving but his quick beating heart.So you go to him, pick up his delicatebody and hold him in the cupped palmsof your hands. You have always knownhe was beautiful, but its only now, in his stillness,in his vulnerability, that you see the miracleof his being, how so much life fits in so smalla space. And so you wait, keeping him warmagainst the unseasonable cold, trusting thatwhen the time is right, when he has recoveredboth his strength and his sense of up and down,he will gather himself, flutter once or twice,and then rise, a streak of dazzlingcolor against a slowly lifting sky.;
Among us twelve, just three have raised a child.Were mostly gray and promise to be fairand wonder if the prosecutor smiledto greet or warn, or both. We go nowherefor weeks. Were stiff and silent in these rows,our faces stony though we ache to cry,delete that damn surveillance video(Exhibit A) that shows a girl, six, die,night, crosswalk, SUV. And in the end,our verdict signed and dated, read aloud,we will resume routinego meet a friendfor lunch on Harrison, admire a cloudabove the bridge, ten thousand cars an hour,some backseats full of kids.;
in my last incarnation i inoculated myselfwith oodles of dago red and stumbled into famewithout falling. i worshipped in the temple of Lady Dayand took Coltrane as my wizard. i always wore my mink coatto the Laundromat and drank pale champagne with mysoft-boiled eggs. i believed King Kong got a raw deal.i believe great and prolonged sex cured cancer. i believedin the afterdeath. i was liberator of cough-and-gaggersfrom the cages of their spew. i scavenged rusted auto parts,built a niggah machine, loaded it with atomic amour andwiped out all purveyors of poverty. . . swapped my pinkpearl for a black sapphire. and then one quincentenniali rose from the magnificent effluvium of my jazzto discover my children did not know me;
associations: years of being ashamed/my sometimesfat, ordinary body. years later shame passedleft a sad aftertaste. mama threatening to beat me if i gotmy hair wet. curses as she brushes the sand out, it\s gonnabreak it offit\s gonna ruin your scalp.or the tall blond haired gold/bronze-muscledlifeguards who played with the little white ones but gawked at us like we were leperssound. the water serpent\s breath: a depth as vast as my hatredskin. my chocolate coating. the rash gone nowas a kid i couldn\t stand the drying effect water hadcoming out wet, cracked and sore all over. one timei caught a starfish, second summer after my divorcei\m not into beaches, or riding waves these days. the only timei like the beach is when it\s cold hostile and gray. i feelkin to it then. or at night. when it speaks a somber tongueonly the enlightened perceive. when the ageless mouths joinsmine. when soft arms caress in timeworn gentleness. or thepoor man\s beach, where bodies echo my chromatic schemefrom just-can-pass to pitch-tar-black. at home among fleshyrumps, tummys, thighs,breasts jiggling a freedom our hearts will never knowsound. eternal splash. a depth as vast as my lovebeached. i turn into the blanket. urge him to fuck me. hethinks it\s corny. i get mad. i get up, stomp away, kickingthe sand . . . while he was with her i was onthe beach wishing he was with me . . . at the beachaware of his hands urgent to touch, take me before wereturn to work/our separate lives . . . here. i watchyou swim into the crest. i\d rather sit and sip wineenjoy the wind than swim or wade. i smile secretlyat thinly clad slappers-on of lotion/a potion to ward offskin cancer. in my fantasy i would challenge the oceana feminist ahab stalking the great white whale. harpoon itand ride down to meet davy jones, contentfor my america dies with mesound. swoosh swoosh the scythe. a depth as vast as my visioni could live by it, pacifica. learn to like it. now that you\rewith me i might even let you teach me how to tread water;
dear Georgiana,trying to do something to shake off thispost holiday boohoohoo.as you know, ive been poking at baby sis again.she looks likestrawberry shortcake, but watch the hardtackunderneath. itllcrack your teeth. it would be victory overraging heartsshould we manage to become friends. but thatsgoing to take morevital stuff than i have to bleed. put that on hold.besieged and collapsing under the weight         of my gift. love        as i live it seems more like Mercurochrome         than anything else        i can conjure up. it lo0oks so pretty and red,         and smells of a balmy        coolness when you uncap the little applicator.         but swab it on an         open sore and you nearly die under the stabbing         burn. recovery         leaves a vague tenderness and an India ink-red         splotch thatll         vanish between one scrubbing or another         Mamas favorite lipstick used to be a sultry         red violent         that segued into the hue of sangria when         applied to her         full rose-brown lips. i liked watching her         slick moves as         she studied her face over the dressing         table mirror, but         best was show she briskly slipped it         from her purse         while sitting in the car, cupping her compact         in one palm while         she uncapped the tube with a flick. One twist         of the brass         canisters butt, and the stick rose for duty         the pangs-n-thangs of girlhood are foremost on my         agenda of items suppressed.         they form the Barrier Reef of my consciousness                  like shipwrecked         swabbies, drunk with trauma, washed inland to         a grimmer death         against the shore where rent flesh, first red,         turns salt white;
after the war the war begins the war goes oni am a soldier. look at my bootssoles worn from seeking work. from hoursin unemployment linescall me a civilian casualtythe war to feed children the war to clothe their backsthe war to meet the rent the war to keep the gas tank full thewar to end the calculated madness keeping the poor poorwhat happens to a war deferreddoes it implode? does repressed aggressionravage the collective soul?(theres rioting now. i see the blaze red smoke rising.the city burns. people are looting, taking things. all theexcess denied them. crimes of possession. to have. withoutthe onus of color or fear of rejection. children carry racksof clothes. women push shopping carts brimming with food.men flavor liquor stores and gunshops. but what we need isrevolution. bloodless or otherwise. we must go deeper thanlust gratified in one spontaneous torrid upsurge of rage)i am a soldier. look at my hairfallen out under stress. the many hoursunappreciated on the job. not even a decent chaircall me collateral damageand when all the foreign battles are wonwill we who battle here at homehave our day in democracys sun?(i am laying on the gurney in the hallway. therearent enough beds. hes been here with me for hours andwe came in last night. and they still havent been able totell us anything. they wanted money up front before theyeven talked to us. luckily we had assistance but still had toborrow from mama to make the cash co-payment. the pain isreal bad and im thirsty. but they said not to drink anything/nothing by mouth. and we had to wait forever just to get thisfar. too many patients and not enough doctors)i am a soldier. but my back is brokebattling the paper i push all day. my hopeis broke too. how do i lovecall me politically correct(we sat in the bar in the late afternoon trying to figure outwhere all the men had gone. the ones that werent dead orin jail. who loved women. the ones who werent junkieswerent alcoholics werent already married. the ones wholove our color. and one sistuh took a tall swig and saidshed be satisfied if she lived to see her refrigerator fulljust once before she departs this planet)what happens to a war deferreddoes it deep down into the skin a rashof discontent to erupt again and again?i am a soldier. that i live is a lieno one stares cuz no one cares. graspingfor a nip of pleasure a toke of sanitycall me a victim of victims(the cuff are tight. i can feel them rubbing against mywrists behind my back. were taken out to the squad carin front of all the neighbors. the kids stare at us. theyknew we were different all along. we didnt belong in thishood. hes angry. he wants to know who ratted. i cant feelanything but numb. they shove him into the back first andthen i climb in behind him. its a short drive to theprecinct. were broke. well have to borrow money forbail. were about to find out who our real friends are)whatevah you dodont look me too long in the eyes;
 after Allen Ginsbergwhat bohunkian images i have of youcrash against my niggernoggin as i shiver and strolllong air-conditioned aisles at 2 a.m. the liquor1 under lock and key, the lettuce full and moist witha fresh spray of mist and neonmy cart wobbles giddily on crooked wheels as i sputterbetween the confused and the absurd as i cruise for puddingand citrus-free hand lotion. theres plenty of disabledparking outside. it is lonely here though theautomatic doors never close and a bleak phosphorescencenever dims and bananas are going at two pounds forthe price for one. the bin of avocados is smalland most of them more like plankton-stained golf ballsor too rotten. somewhere, i am detected via cameralens while picking over pepper mills betweenthe spice racks and the baking soda hang ten toward checkout is a certaintythe only Walt here is Disneythe pork chops are killing mei am a nobody angelmy heart is a frozen delicacy;
overcome by the stink of mildewed wash, i havebeen three months behind in my rent for thirty years. mycountrymen do not love me. even my lines havelines. we are getting old in a city where the old areinvisible. i have nothing new to eat and barely five minutesto use the jane. and less time than that to revisit myfathers grave. ive worn the same underwear for fifteenof those thirty years and some pieces longer than thatwriting friends is a luxury, enemies a necessity. my carwas stripped and stolen months ago and i have nomoney with which to repair or replace it. my mentors haveexiled me to the outskirts of nappy literacy. my wallet isdying of militant brain cancer. my lust for my countryis frigid. the light excludes me and there isno degree for what is learned in the darki am too clumsy to steal big. there is a boogie man inNew York City who conspires against and spreadsrumors about my lost lip. i am so economically crippledeven my begging cup has mold sprouting in its well. myson has mistaken me for a dragon and his history teachers keeptrying to hose out these flames in my mouth. i do notattend my high school class reunions because too many ofmy classmates died in Vietnam or in the liquor lockersof America or in those classrooms long ago. there isa boogiewoman in Oberlin who conspires against me, herjealousy inspired by my imaginary imaginingsi am trapped in the hold of my greedy griefand expected to keep circling. i expect my son to escapeand my husband to die during exquisite crisis. the federalbureau of pajamas is after my hot cross buns. i expect toawaken from sleep soon. i expect my banana nut bread togo stale and uneaten. i expect to die poemless and to becremated in state ovens. i expect my ashesto be scattered like pollen, to take wing on the windlike buddhaflies;
We all have the same little bones in our foottwenty-six with funny names like navicular.Together they build something strongour foot arch a pyramid holding us up.The bones dont get casts when they break.We tape themone phalange to its neighbor for support.(Other things like sorrow work that way, toofind healing in the leaning, the closeness.)Our feet have one quarter of all the bones in our body.Maybe we should give more honor to feetand to all those tiny but blessed cogs in the worldcommunities, the forgotten architecture of friendship.Illustration by Neebinnaukzhik Southall;
A fatherless child will do almostanything to receive approvalfrom the world.A nodor reallyany sign of recognitionwould cause me to put my own life in danger.OnceI let my sister lift meon top of both of her extended feetin the middle of the darkof our shared pink and white bedroom.She mimicked a rickety resemblance of Supermanher legs locked at the kneeand me, dangling in the airboth her hands holding tight my wrists.I lie back on the soles of her feetlet her kick me up into the nights jawline.I landed hard against a planksplintered against the edgeof our new and exposed steel bed frame.My forearm split itself into a welcome floodblood spilling like a songand I swore I could hear my father sing.;
Sacred stars blanket a nighttime sky,each light reminds us of the preciousness of life.Your memory lives along the Milky Way,each twinkle saying dont forget my name.Its an epidemic, a sickness of the earth,a war we enter as soon as we are birthed.Indigenous women, girls, our two-spirit, too.When did this world start disappearing you?;
i look in the mirror, and all the chips ive eatenthis month have accumulatedlike schoolwork at the bottom of my tummy,my bellya country im trying to love.my mouth is a lover devoted to you, my belly, my bellythe birds will string a song togetherwith wind for you and your armyof solids, militia of grease.americans love excess, but we also love jeans,and refuse to make excess comfortable in them.i step into a fashionable prison,my middle managed and fastened intosuffering. my gracious gut,dutiful dome, i will wear a house for youthat you can live in, promise wallsthat embrace your growing flesh,and watch you reach toward everything possible.;
I guess you could call me broken,says one. Im still lonely, says another,but now I can name it with a song.In my poem, says another,I can forget I am forgotten. NowI understand being misunderstood,says another. And another says,in a bold, undeniable voice of power,I wont step down from myself again.And they are beautiful, beautiful,standing one by one at the micwhere they have come forth at lastfrom behind the curtain.;
The design committee for making the worldhad stalled with the problem of drought.We have the sea over here, the desertover therehow many roads do we need,how many trucks, how many miles of pipe?At the back of the great hall stood the daughterof the doorman, who had brought him supper.She pulled him down to whisper in his earher dream of the mystery of mist. My child,he whispered, that makes no sense at all.;
Wake up, greet the sun, and pray.Burn cedar, sweet grass, sagesacred herbs to honor the lives weve been given,for we have been gifted these ways since the beginning of time.Remember, when you step into the arena of your life,think about those who stand beside you, next to, and with you.Your ancestors are always in your corner, along with your people.When we enter this world we are born hungry,our spirits long for us to live out our traditionsthat have been passed down for generations.Prayer, ceremony, dance, languageour ways of being.Never forget you were put on this earth for a reasonhonor your ancestors.Be a good relative.Illustration by Colin Laurel;
Mankato, MN, my hometown, is the site of the largest mass execution ever on US soil: a platform, 38 men hung, jeers and sneers of the masses. This is the aftermath of the US Dakota War. Growing up I remember a small plaque, referring to this historical event, lay hidden among the library shadows. Now, a public library sits on this site next to the Minnesota Rivera waterway encased in blue clay shores. These are the voices I heard: the 38 Dakota. I hope we always remember the stories and lives of the Original People.Their memory, do not let it lie fallowOn the blue earth banksWhich caught the 38 tearsAs they spilled, shedding death amid jeers.Mother absorbed them,Heard them,Entwined them in the River Minnesota.Oh, Mankato. My Mankato, what have you done?The shades of flesh are notRedNorWhiteButHonor and dishonor,Truth and deceptions,Peace and fury.So, Mother, continue your burial.Swallow the 38 into your blue earthen clay,Molding a fount to hold the tears:Washing out the words sioux uprising and dakota conflict.Mother, clasp the vibrationsOf their last voices rising to sing,I am here!From the waters edge,Let all remember and hear your funeral dirge in the currents of the RiverMinnesota.;
Apart, we are two quiet things:a person and an instrument.I in my body,the clarinet in its case.We are like good friends.The clarinet takes nothing away from me.It lets me borrow its notes.If I loan it my breath,I can speak with its sweet voice.Together, we will make a worldfull of song.Illustration by Rudy Gutierrez;
voice of incoming 2 express trainpray herself altarcontort mouth shotgun:sawed off     a sawsoften tongue songbirdhands mosaicked mirrorsdonning skin like battle geardawning skin like evening gownthis name pinned on her shoulders a heavy mantle. an incantation.;
Because they were rich and clever, allthe ambassadors designed an echo chamberof glass and platitudes, and took turns denyingthe future. And because they were old, onlythe next few years mattered, and so they pushed aroundtarnished words like chess pieces in their narrow grid:progress, growth, stabilitywords any child could see were obscene, werea screen obscuring catastrophe. So Greta stoodand showed them what maturity looks like,what truth sounds like,what leadership feels like,and then she went home to change us.;
1Standing outsidestaring at a treegentles our eyesWe cheerto see fireflieswinking againWhere have our friends beenall the long hours?Minds stretchingbeyond the fieldbecometheir own skiesWindows doorsgrow moreimportantLook through a wordswing that sentencewide openKneeling outsideto findsturdy greenglistening blossomsunder the breezethat carries us silently2And there were so many more poems to read!Countless friends to listen to.We didnt have to be in the same roomthe great modern magic.Everywhere together now.Even scared together nowfrom all points of the globewhich lessened it somehow.Hopeful together too, exchangingwinks in the dark, the little lights blinking.When your hope shrinksyou might feel the hope ofsomeone far away lifting you up.Hope is the thing...Hope was always the thing!What else did we give each otherfrom such distances?Breath of syllables,sing to me from your balconyplease! Befriend mein the deep space.When you paused for a poemit could reshape the dayyou had just been living.Illustration by Jillian Tamaki;
I come from a country so far awaythat you may have visited only in your dreams.My face does not bear the pale color of my palms.I dont speak your language at home.I dont even sound like you.If you come to my house, youll see my family:my mother in a sari,my father wearing a sacred thread around his body,and me, eating a plate of spicy biryaniinstead of a burger or pizzaat the dinner table.If you, for a moment, shed your filter,you will also see my pockets filled with Tootsie Rolls,waiting to be shared with you.Illustration by Lisa Desimini;
A doll was forgotten in a bedroomwhen the old owners of the house moved outand G-ma and Gramps moved their family in.Theres an old photograph in an albumof boy Uncle Roy laughing, holding itin a jumble of moving-in boxes.It spent thirty years on the shelf in the hall closet,a reminder of the history of the house.It was graduated up to the atticthe day G-ma made the last house payment.Theres a framed photo of that day,G-ma surrounded by handsome men sons.My cousins and I sit in the parlorpaging through albums. Photos on the wallscapture special events, celebrations.The grownup voices drift across the hall:Dad and the uncles sharing memories,two aunts calling from the kitchen.The cousins whisper about The Floatin Baby.My dad says he was always scared of that doll...Yeah, and my dad says he thought it carried the ragethe before-us owners felt when they sold the houseto Gramps and G-ma...Youd open the closet door,even in August, and feel the rage chill...Ten minutes alone in the attic, the cousins say,and The Floatin Baby floats up from behindthe boxes and spiderwebs. Theyve all seen her:a plump, pink babydoll with wide blue eyes,puckering up and holding out her arms.Just ten minutes alone up there. You scared?Just ten minutes alone, the cousins coax.Come on. Its our family tradition...The attics up two flights of stairslined with sad-looking wallpaper.Where we live, houses dont have inside steps.Or basements, or second floors, or attics.I walk in front, hand on the bannister.We pass Malcolm, Dr. King, and Barackand Michelle Obama, weddings, babies.We pass a scroll called The Serenity Prayer.Young Dad holds his thumbs up before I was born,and it feels like hes looking straight at me.Omari leads us up the attic stairsinto a cold, dark-raftered open spacewhere plastic clothes bags hang from a garment rackand trunks and boxes gape open here and there.The other cousins huddle together.I ask myself: Am I a fraidy-cat?I pick up a few old hardcover booksand some brittle-paged, browning paperbacksand put them back. Look one by onethrough a pile of kid art signed in crayon.The cousins have stopped whispering. I amalone. I hear feet rumbling down the stairs.I find a bundle of stamped envelopesaddressed in cursive to G-ma as Miss.Im standing there concentrating on untying the knots,when...      light falls on something in the shadows!The Floatin Baby!...                     And you know what?                                    She looksjust like my friend Evans baby sister.I pick her up and put her in a box,on top of some books and old report cards.I find a fake fur jacket in the garment bagand tuck her under it, so she looks warm.If she was carrying rage, its time to stop.Evans baby sister can say my name.I hear them calling Dinners served!I run downstairs, wash my hands, take my place.The cousins grin at me, and raise their thumbs.G-ma tells Uncle John to say the grace.She tells Uncle Roy to carve the bird.She says Yall remember to save room for my pie!Illustration by James Ransome;
When a whole beingbirths into your handsstill you see your handsno matter how unworldlythe beauty of the childThen the universe of wordsworks past cosmologyto a useful name     a handlein English unlike the Indigenousgenderless language of verbsMoon blues     comet missesmoon looms super      moon bleedsmany cosmological shifts laterour hands eclipsed bythe lovely being come so farCome closer than everacross the several heavenswe Ojibwe namethe layers of our atmosphereand further out therethe fourth sky       forever skyWhen you first came to uswe did not have an Ojibwe nameto know the sky beyondthe sky beyond the skyHow were we to knowhe was she wasthey areyouHow were we to know who?;
Mahogany L. Browne, On MeditationWhich means, sometimes, you disarmThe goon by acting the foolwhat they wantIs your throat cut, or your heart brokenBy a dum-dum bullet, or your eyes fillingWith the void. So they leave with their cartoonOf you in their heads. The instant they turnthe flood waters stopping just before the top step,The hawk grasping feathers instead of fleshAll the small stuffyour sweat beading offYour skin, your breath slowing back from flightTo human, youve won it. You can pass it on.;
Invisible children fallthrough the cracks of the systemlike Alice in the rabbit hole.But these children wont findan eat-me cake or a drink-me bottle.They wont wake up on the lapof a loving sister.Theyll open their eyes on the handof a monster called Negligencewholl poke them with its sharp teethand bait them with its heartless laughter,like a wild thing in a wild rumpus.But the children wont awaketo the smell of a warm supper,nor will they find a purple crayonto draw an escape door or a window.Instead theyll make a mirrorof a murky puddle on the city streetwhich wont tell them theyre beautifulbut itll show their scars, as invisible to othersas these children are.;
       still, living like they orbit one another,my grandfather, the planet, & grandma, his moon assignedby some gravitational pull. they have loved long enoughfor a working man to retire. grandma says shes not tired,she wears her husband like a coat that survives every season,talks about him the way my parents talk about vinylthe subject salvaged by the tent of their tongues.grandma returns to her love like a hymn, marks it with a color.when the world ends will it suck the earth of all its love?will i go taking somebodys hand,my skin becoming their skin?the digital age is taking away our winters,and im afraid the sun is my soulmate,that waste waits for a wet kiss,carbon calls me pretty, and i thinkdeath is a good first date.i hope when the world ends it leaves them be,spares grandpa and his game,grandma spinning corn into weight,the two of them reeling into westerntheme songs, the TV louderthan whatevers coming.;
our children in the line of firescrambling for their liveswhile we dreamily polish our gunsreminders of the good old dayswhen we lived in the wild westwhen war was a synonym of greatnesswhen guns didnt fire eight hundred rounds a minutewe cherish the smell of red brass and gunpowderas our children practice hiding in closetslearning to shiver and cry in silenceinstead of multiplication factswe pat our sweet babies headsand send them off to the line of fire;
Id like to be a shrine, so I can learn from peoples prayers the story of hearts. Id like to be a scarf so I can place it over my hair and understand other worlds. Id like to be the voice of a soprano singer so I can move through all borders and see them vanish with every spell-binding note. Id like to be light so I illuminate the dark. Id like to be water to fill bodies so we can gently float together indefinitely. Id like to be a lemon, to be zest all the time, or an olive tree to shimmer silver on the earth. Most of all, Id like to be a poem, to reach your heart and stay.;
it was always the older kidsrunning to Riverside,hiding behind trees and underneathjungle gyms, holding their breathin the darkness as the other teamtried to find them.I could not wait to be old enough a captors arms clasping.Manhunt, manhunt 1, 2, 3.This poem asks me to turnthe compass in a differentdirection:perhaps commentary on policeor the assaultsthat happen in the darkwhen children play gameswhile adults sip beers andsummer unrolls a carpetinto the worst of memories.But no. Sometimesbeing honest means offeringmore than one draft.The game wasa different kind of winning:the chase about the waiting,wanting to hear acountdown softly whisperedas the July airstuck our baby hairsto our necks, and everythingwas playful in the damp.;
has magical pockets.People come from all over the estate.They pay and hurry away.We watch from our bedroom window,through bunkbed bars, we pretend were in prison.We ask Danielle, What sort of magic?She says, Dunno.Danielle is not very clever.She thinks the Woolwich Ferry is the Titanic.Look! She said as we drove around the roundabout,The Titanic!Even Mum pretended not to laugh.When Danielle is playing over,we can only play cheat-Scrabbleas she isnt very good at spellings or maths either.We just write our namesthen add our letters together.Out of Rachel, Maria and Danielle,I am the winner.Sometimes, Danielles dad reaches into his pocketand yanks out a black Lab puppy called Bo.Or a quadbike for JJ.Or lacy pink curtains for their screaming mum.But most often Danielles dad yanks out fistfuls of coins .The most coins Ive ever seen in a real-life hand .When were playing out with Danielle, hell say,Oi, ghels, go get some iscream or sumfink.We cheer, we shout, Thank you, Danielles dad!He doesnt even count it, just pours the thick goldinto our cupped hands till they bubble over.We skip towards the ice cream man.When we pay, we remember to cover our boobswith our other hand. We dont take a licktill were back behind the garages.As he kisses my earlobe before bed,I tell Dad, Danielles dad is richer than you.Hmm, I bet he is, Dad says.;
Im still here, in a skinthinner than a dybbuks raincoat strange as the birds who scrounge,those stubborn pumpsthat bring up nothing...Maddened by youfor whom the cash register,with its clerical bells,is a national church you, whose instant smilecracks the earth at my feet...May your wife go to paradisewith the garbage man,your prick hang like a shoelace,your balls become raisins,hair grow on the whites of your eyesand your eyelashes turninto lawn mowersthat cut from nine to five...Man is a skin diseasethat covers the earth.The stars are antibodiesapproaching, your presidentis a tsetse-fly...;
Q. How do others sin against you?A. By cursing metelling lies about meor striking me.Q. What must you do to those who thus sin against you?A. I must forgive them.*See, I learned my catechism well.Learned to offer my cloak and coat, my cheekagain and again as the skin was splayedfrom my body. I can quoteMartin Luther King Jr. with ease,praise the Americana of his martyrdom,the sweet, unselfish beauty of that bullets velocity.Shall I sing We Shall Overcome whileI swing? I have wanted so longto believe in justice, to think of each blowas recompense for my wickedness.How can I continue?How can I continue?How can I continueto take and eat this imageof myself, choke on the eloquenceof my dissent, speak love fluentlyto someone with his kneeon my neck, his bullet in my child?*A Catechism, to Be Taught Orally to Those Who Cannot Read  Designed Especially for the Instruction of the Slaves in the Protestant Episcopal Church in the Confederate States.;
i.i am sitting in sunday schoolin a handsewn pink dress and white lace tightsi am putting my hand down when welearn about david and jonathani am not asking if king david was bii am taking communioni am bowing my head in the pewso the stained glass burnsa rainbow into my backand not my faceii.i am adopted into a familywith two dads who sing praisesof rupaul and gagaso i dont think twice wheni am lying on the floor in her treehouseon a sunday morning and sheis holding my hands between hers as ifin gentle prayeriii.i am sneaking awayfrom church campto skinny-dip orplay suck and blowwith five stranger-friendswho are sleeping on the beachand the fireflies flutterin my chest when the paper falls firstbetween her and iand then later themiv.i am screaming as my motherwatches them take me awayher sandbag silencewill haunt me in other liveslives where i am not restrainedin a glass box as the eldersof the church pour holy water overmy face to drown the devil in mewhile i choke and splutterbut i love heri love herv.i am straight as my teeth ora church pew and my mother doesnt hate me;
For JonathanHe died with the needle lying beside him like a friendin the darkness of Bostons North End. The others tiptoedout, their steps rewound like an old VHS trisected by stripesof black-and-white staticpoison push fentanyl-laced custody familygarbled hush with its exacting latitudes, turned-around timezones, I imagine they walked backward, never turning back,down the staircase until they found themselves out on the streetdazed, counting drops of rain, pocketing their lightersand syringes, fingering the cool hollows of their spoonsthinking: Thank God today has yet to happen. What does it taketo make you walk backward? Turn your back to a mirror, hold up a mirror:an endless passage opens behind you. At the funeral I staredat the singers feet, her black sandal straps like a series of cross-outs:no and no and no. This is how it happened: his mind stumblingaround on K Street asking for money, and one by onethey turned him down: pretty twenty-somethings of his eyes,slouched postal clerk of his mouth, his heart a bull-faced truckermaking his way south, beating heavy metal into the dashboard.No and no and no and how do you let the static enter you?Shoot it? Snort it? Suck it all in? Or just let it hushthe others still standing in the rain: Is he messing with us?Sleeping? Each answer the same. To turn around nowwould be to go forward. But to keep going is to goI want the static to tear through me like traffic and the bracelethe gave me with beads like tiny gold seeds, the notebook with a mapof the world. I remember his hands: giant, kind fists. There is no order-liness to this, no way to spool the dark tape of itthe othersfast-forwarded down the stairs, scattered under an opensky, and I try to march back, but I can only arriveat the feet of that singer, her toenail polish bruise-coloredas summers we were younger and younger, tray of iridescencewhere we dipped our hoops, trailed shining tunnels behind us forever.;
To grow old is to lose everything.Aging, everybody knows it.Even when we are young,we glimpse it sometimes, and nod our headswhen a grandfather dies.Then we row for years on the midsummerpond, ignorant and content. But a marriage,that began without harm, scattersinto debris on the shore,and a friend from school dropscold on a rocky strand.If a new love carries uspast middle age, our wife will dieat her strongest and most beautiful.New women come and go. All go.The pretty lover who announcesthat she is temporaryis temporary. The bold woman,middle-aged against our old age,sinks under an anxiety she cannot withstand.Another friend of decades estranges himselfin words that pollute thirty years.Let us stifle under mud at the ponds edgeand affirm that it is fittingand delicious to lose everything.;
I had a dreamthat I read a poemto a womanand criedat how beautifulit wasand she criedat how beautifulthat wasand I thoughthow even mythoughts area problem.a white womansaid she wouldnever teach mehow to whistleand I onlyasked becauseshe knew howto whistleand maybeI should justsay how beautifulthat was. when I wasat the barand Gregwas spinninga womanwalked by meand founda spotto dance,not withany bodyor lookingat any oneand if rightnow yourewonderingif knowingwho Greg isis importantI willjust say nobut it helps,and yes Gregis important.my exs glassesI foundin my bathroomthat shetold meto throw awaythe abilityto pivotsleep. afterwe brokeup I toldmy friendKyleand if yourewonderingyes, youneed toreferencewhat I saidabout Greg.yes, wewere drunkyes, mostof it is a blurbut theevents arentreally important.but. backto my dreamwhat doyou thinkthat womanlooked like,how aboutthe womanat the club,how aboutif I tell youthat neitherof them lookedlike the womanwho, likea hunter,watchedthe houndrun offto bring backwhat wasshot outof the sky,and realizesI dont wantto come back.whats beautifulabout thatis a beaglestanding bya lagoon,so maybeIll juststand herefor a while,the breezefeels nice,I can smellthe petrichor.;
For Kia XiongBut its just an earthquake in Indiana. I love this storybecause of you. We met in high school summer gymwhere we turned jeans into floatation devices and talliedbowling scores by hand. We got close in AP Englishwhen we admitted that we read Jane Eyre in one evening,how we loved the teachers tape recording of Macbethbecause we really didnt understand what was supposedto be funny. Back then, we wanted to be rappers or doctors,and now philanthropic EDM DJs in Vegas. We love to chugcoffee past 11 p.m. so we can shit a final time beforea night of dancing and waddling through snow in heelswe bought after we broke up with our boyfriends.The older we get, we are always late. Like to the Odesza concertyou won radio tickets to, how we shivered underneathfleece blankets covered in dog hair, the outfits we picked outmonths before never seen in our blurry pictures. I am writing all thisto get to what I really want to sayyou are the most faithful personI know. You believe in prayer because you believe in ghosts,in vengeful spirits because youve seen them. Once, you askedif I thought you were silly for being so superstitiousand I said noI pray when I am scared, the only time I takein Jesuss name I pray seriously. Me trusting my mouth and you,for good measure, hanging a picture of Jesus above the bed,a crucifix, and a Bible on your nightstand even thoughwe dont read it anymore. Here, I try to conjure imagesor metaphors of our selves but I can only rememberwhat we say to each otherisnt it funny how every Asian girl we knowis engaged or about to be engaged to a white boy ordont trust white moms from Carmel because they votedfor Trump or wed rather them smile at us while keeping their hateto themselves or isnt it funny we dont go out anymore or this is betterthan the drunk white boys who follow us to the car all the timeor after midnight or our mothers this our mothers that or;
We all have the same little bones in our foottwenty-six with funny names like navicular.Together they build something strongour foot arch a pyramid holding us up.The bones dont get casts when they break.We tape themone phalange to its neighbor for support.(Other things like sorrow work that way, toofind healing in the leaning, the closeness.)Our feet have one quarter of all the bones in our body.Maybe we should give more honor to feetand to all those tiny but blessed cogs in the worldcommunities, the forgotten architecture of friendship.Illustration by Neebinnaukzhik Southall;
I come from a country so far awaythat you may have visited only in your dreams.My face does not bear the pale color of my palms.I dont speak your language at home.I dont even sound like you.If you come to my house, youll see my family:my mother in a sari,my father wearing a sacred thread around his body,and me, eating a plate of spicy biryaniinstead of a burger or pizzaat the dinner table.If you, for a moment, shed your filter,you will also see my pockets filled with Tootsie Rolls,waiting to be shared with you.Illustration by Lisa Desimini;
it was always the older kidsrunning to Riverside,hiding behind trees and underneathjungle gyms, holding their breathin the darkness as the other teamtried to find them.I could not wait to be old enough a captors arms clasping.Manhunt, manhunt 1, 2, 3.This poem asks me to turnthe compass in a differentdirection:perhaps commentary on policeor the assaultsthat happen in the darkwhen children play gameswhile adults sip beers andsummer unrolls a carpetinto the worst of memories.But no. Sometimesbeing honest means offeringmore than one draft.The game wasa different kind of winning:the chase about the waiting,wanting to hear acountdown softly whisperedas the July airstuck our baby hairsto our necks, and everythingwas playful in the damp.;
They ignored the new boy,snickering behind his back.                          In silence, I stayed  safe.                          My lips pressed     together.Growing bolder, theypierced him with arrow-sharpwords.                          I pretended                          I hadnt           heard.They twisted his arms.One word escaped his lipsbefore they dragged himout of sight, out of earshot:Cowards!                          I ran              away.                          All the             words                          I didnt say          haunt me every day.;
You cannot pronounce my name.Soor-ya. Not soar.Suryathe sun god.Mom always tells me that a smile heals everything.So I try.I sit beside you in the cafeteriaand smile.You look down at your foodand eat your cheeseburger,I eat the lemon rice in my box.My mom cut and squeezed two lemonsand cracked open a coconut to make my lunch.I savor every spoon of my vegan ricewhile you savor your meat patty.You enjoy your burger. I enjoy my lemon rice.We dont say anything to each otheruntil almost the end of the lunch break.I apologize for splattering inkon your shirt when you got my name wrong this morning.You smile back at me. Surya, you say.You dont know how that makes me feel.Mom is right.A smile always heals.;
I come home,feet about to bleedfrom angry stomping.Boy! says Mom.Quit making all that racket.But what does she expectwhen, day after day,haters sling words at melike jagged stonesdesigned to split my skin?I retreat to my room,collapse on the bed,count, One. Two. Three...When I get to ten,I snatch up journal and pen,flip to a clean page,and unload my hurt, my ragetil I can breathe, again.Letter by letter,I rediscovermy power to decidewhich words matter,which words dont,and whose.Calm, now, I remember:I get to choose.;
Imvepi refugee settlement, UgandaAgain, a child is the missing letterin this algebra of grief,slips out of the company of broken menfurling into a country of themselves.I watch him meld into the loop of kidsgathered around a relief truckin a procession of songs.They join arms, hopping.It is how they teach a quiet return to love,these kids shedding weightstheir bodies became too frail to bear.Their litanies echo in the dark,beseeching days ahead to be kinder.;
So early its still almost dark out.Im near the window with coffee,and the usual early morning stuffthat passes for thought.When I see the boy and his friendwalking up the roadto deliver the newspaper.They wear caps and sweaters,and one boy has a bag over his shoulder.They are so happythey arent saying anything, these boys.I think if they could, they would takeeach others arm.Its early in the morning,and they are doing this thing together.They come on, slowly.The sky is taking on light,though the moon still hangs pale over the water.Such beauty that for a minutedeath and ambition, even love,doesnt enter into this.Happiness. It comes onunexpectedly. And goes beyond, really,any early morning talk about it.;
Whose own mother left themthree years ago, whose father cares for them nowthough barely, it is said, always ill-fittingschool uniforms and dirty casual clothes,who do no sports, and owning nothingare impossible to punish.The school and the suburb knows it.Too young for banishment they mustbe accommodated yet might run amok,say we couldnt help ourselves,mutilations in our blood.How could they, motherless, ever knowwhich versions of themselves shouldtake precedence? How could they learnto want what it is possible to have?In the rain my mother drives me to school butthere they are at the bus stop, mopingin regulation school-gray rain jackets.A lift cant be offered, consider their likely wetnessand their intractablegroup lumpiness, the three of themdripping there in the backseats,struggling with seat beltsand where to put their bags,and the dank smell of them in the tight car.Would they speak in unison, like angels?Would they have a chosen speaker, and if sowould they confer before responding?In whispers or by silent looks?Or would they speak independently in strange grunts,produce a chaotic babble thatcould not be quieted?It is inexplicable, how they keep to themselves,how quietly they play, seriousand strong-shouldered and ineffectual as birds,even now by the canal, as though unobserved,unhated, as though they will not die of bullets andfast moving cars and needlesin rooms in other cities, scattered,die of their own sheer unbelongingthe way I would if I were them.;
To make a startout of particularsand make them general, rollingup the sum, by defective means         Wm. Carlos Williams         Paterson: Book 1Feb. 15 \93                        1Los Feliz Blvd Bridge:       The flood water watchers       feel the power of the river       roaring underneath their feet       as the rain pelts the pavement,       swelling the river even further.This bridge went out in the flood of 1936       A tree trunk broadsides       the bridge\s buttresses.       At 30 m.p.h., the whole structure       takes the shock. All of us feel it       in the dark. We laugh nervously,       caught in the headlights       of a video van.Lit by a field producer, the weather man does his midnight stand-up.                         2       To lay this down once and for all.       To lay my burdens down.       To lay my body down.       That\ll be the day.                         3      Climbing up into the San Gabriels      in a caravan of cars behind Jim      and Jack and Dorothy Green and      Tom Janeway and Torii getting antsy,      I want to see the creek. We get there.      Torii crawls out on      a branch above a      waterfall, calling      back at us,      Two rocks!      When we turn around,      we think we see      the chilly waters descending      into Greater Los Angeles.                         4      Catherine Mulholland says      that when she was a girl sometimes      you\d have to row to Van Nuys High School.      Now the school is bordered by deep concrete canals.      There used to be      enough water to      irrigate with      nearly all year-round      around here.      Where did it go?      Literally, where did it go?      Now there\s just the      Technical Advisory Board      of Friends of the Los Angeles River      trying to figure out      how much of it      has been lost.                         5                      Very intense dreams               I must be coming                      down with something.               I hope it\s nothing                      nearly as intense               as my vision of Earth                      as the New Mars               red dust storms rolling                      around a planet               that died a long time ago.                         6      At the overflow ponds      between the river and the      Virginia Country Club      I saw a Great Blue Heron      regurgitate its lunch, a      foot-long carp that was      still struggling for its life,      as he beat it to death against      a rock. His wings raised,      his shoulders hunched,      the Blue wards off a snowy white      American Egret      that\s jabbing its beak      into the back of the Blue\s      trying to get at his food.      The Blue Line train      rumbles by overhead      with its passengers      pointed toward Los Angeles.      No one even looks up from      their newspapers, the      Press-Telegram and the                       Daily Breeze.                         7What is a river       little boys throwing         rocks in             to hear them plop.  Bigger boys on mopeds.      Big boys drinking port winesmash their bottles,   showering the concreted river shoulderwith glittering glass.                  Pelicans dive into a      school of fish just down-             stream from the Anaheim Street Bridge              in Long Beach,the distant Vincent Thomas              barely visible as the rain descends.          It doesn\t pay to be      merely pictorial.Pelicans, you must be                the agents of your        own survival.                         8                        I wish you would                 walk with me here                            more often             red-wing blackbirds      nesting in the cat-tailselectricity humming       in the high-tension lines.                         9      In this terrible dream      my poetry books      were left to moulder      in the Rose Garden      while I did the play-by-play      for my son\s high school football games.      What I objected to was the clich\d rain      beating down on the heartfelt city      like tears. What I objected to      was the 1000\s of storm drains      that carrier our garbage      down the river to the sea.                         10      My sunglasses flipped off my head          and fell into the river with a splash      while the cameras whirred.          What did I learn at the Water & Power meeting?      Don\t be cool.                It\s not Us vs. Them      It\s the wind      as it bends \cross the river.      It\s the cottonwoods      as the garbage that festooned their branches      at the end of the rainy season      disappears beneath their delicately curling      pale-green foliages      by the middle of Spring.                         11                  The man is in the river.                  The woman is the river.                  The man is washing his clothes.                         1215 year-old                Adam Bischoff                              reaches desperately                                               for the out-stretched fireman\s hand                 but the river\s too fast.                                               It rolls himunderneath the Balboa Blvd Bridge.                             He\s alreadyhalf-dead,          his body temperature falling into hypothermia           fighting   to keep himself from falling asleep             as a rope ladder suspended from a          swift water rescue team helicopter                                          bobs just out of reach.          His rescuers                    watch helplessly                               from the banks                        as he disappears          through the weir into                our ancient fear   of drowning.                         13                  I like the way you                  bent over naked, flesh                  caf au lait in the moonlight                  through the bay laurel,                  to take my cock.                         14      Underneath the      Glendale Freeway Bridge      a troll leans out at me,      howling drunkenly      I luuuuuve yoooo!      I blow him a kiss      as I jog by on my first run      home from the Doctor\s      Just wanting to check how      the organism is operating.      I reach into my lungs      for more energy and bend      into the oxbow that starts      at the north end of the      Taylor Yard. The first thing      I ever learned about the river      was that it wanted to wend.                         15      The morning was clear and crisp.      I wore a hand-me-down tweed suit from Mr. Guy.      I walked along the river with the Mayor      and a few city councilmen. It was a pure      photo opportunity. It flutters into my memory      like a snapshot taken by a friend of mine,      Mr. Big Greg Edwards, or Treetop as he used to be      called before he started painting and      signing his works Gregory.                         16THE FOUNDING OF FRIENDS OF THE LOS ANGELES RIVER      Pat Patterson, Roger Wong, and I      meet Fred Fisher      at the old Challenge Dairy on Vignes Street      for early morning      brandies and coffee.      We are on our way      down to the river      for the first time.      We carry heavy duty wire clippers      to cut through the fence beside the      1st Street Bridge courtesy of Gregg Gannon,      then we      climb down the steep,      cement-covered bank      to the river.      We don\t know where we\re going exactly.      We walk upstream      to where the Arroyo Seco      flows into the Los Angeles.      This must have been      one of the most beautiful places      around here, once      a thicket, a confluence,      an Avalon at the meeting      of year-round streams.      Dear quiver at the edge of memory.      Night herons splash.      There are steelhead. We don\t like      to look backwards.      Now there are railroad tracks      on both banks of the river, two freeway      bridgesthe 110, and the 5cross it.      Through a tunnel where somebody is      sleeping on a grey mattress      in a torched VW van,      the Arroyo meekly flows.      Cement will turn back,      into sand some day. Today there\s      thirty guys with jackhammers, leveling      the pavement      ahead of an airport runway paving machine.      It makes an unholy noise,      so we address ourselves to the river.      We ask if we can      speak on its behalf      in the human realm.      We can\t hear the river saying no      so we get to work.      News Item: Devil\s Gate Dam is re-named the      Hahamungna Watershed Park. In Gabrieleno,      Hahamungna means Flowing Waters, Fertile Valley.      Today the Hahamungna flows into the Los      Angeles northwest of downtown. What was the Los Angeles River called      before the arrival of the Christian priests?;
For TThe number of years of your sentence...Your favorite number.Its lucky for me. They have to rule in my favor now.Forget-me-notsYour favorite flowers.Cuz they match my eyes, faded though they are now.You threaded them into every cap, bootie, bag you crocheted.Always, you asked for smokes in exchangeYour neighbors ordered them in the next commissary.Once you asked for a Kit Kat, excited that your daughterwould visit you. They denied her entry, and you returned to the celland flushed down the Kit Kat right away.Afterward, you crocheted a dress for her, sitting upon the lower bunk, not sleeping for a week.Each time we met, youd end with an Im so tired breathYou lost your appeal.What started as an ordinary coldthe prison doc diagnosingon the kite itself that you sent requesting an X-rayturned into cells multiplying like the lace in your hands.At least, I am getting outyou had winkedthe last time we met.;
A hanging in Northport, Alabama, 1897Welcome to this joyful event.Boot heels stompto the pulled stringsof the fiddle.Spilt ale bridges the gapsbetween pale fingersas upturned jugspass in celebration.The scent of wet leavesand raucous laughterfill my head.Am I alone?Or does the cold wet groundonly reserve these soundsfor those who are one breathfrom its embrace?My chaffed wrists are slit,filling fast with rope fibersand warm blood.My throat burnsin anticipationof the ropes turnto place its fingersaround my neck.The slightest movementflakes the dried semenof my four rapists.Look as they kickto the boot heels rhythm.I wish that was all they took.Flakes fall as the nooses knotbrings my ear to a searing hot,I am forced to standupon unstable legs.Replaying the look on my sons faceas they did the same.Hes eight, how can he feelshame?His non-cryas the knot slidesand he begins to diegives me the strengthnot to beg.A nigger hangingsuch a joyful event,so I smile.;
You are the ice cream sandwich connoisseur of your generation.Blessed are your floral shorteralls, your deeply pink fanny pack with travel-size lint roller just in case.Level of splendiferous in your outfit: 200.Types of invisible pain stemming from adolescent disasters in classrooms, locker rooms, & quite often Toyota Camrys: at least 10,000.You are not a jigglypuff, not yet a wigglytuff.Reporters & fathers call your generation the worst.Which really means queer kids who could go online & learn that queer doesnt have to mean disaster.Or dead.Instead, queer means, splendiferously, you.& you means someone who knows that common flavors for ice cream sandwiches in Singapore include red bean, yam, & honeydew.Your powers are great, are growing.One day you will create an online personality quiz that also freshens the breath.The next day you will tell your father, You were wrong to say that I had to change.To make me promise I would. To make me promise.& promise.;
For Alicia M. Quesnel, MDiWhen you open my ear, touch itgently.My mothers voice lingers somewhere inside.Her voice is the echo that helps recover my equilibriumwhen I feel dizzy during my attentiveness.You may encounter songs in Arabic,poems in English I recite to myself,or a song I chant to the chirping birds in our backyard.When you stitch the cut, dont forget to put all these back in my ear.Put them back in order as you would do with books on your shelf.iiThe drones buzzing sound,the roar of an F-16,the screams of bombs falling on houses,on fields, and on bodies,of rockets flying awayrid my small ear canal of them all.Spray the perfume of your smiles on the incision.Inject the song of life into my veins to wake me up.Gently beat the drum so my mind may dance with yours,my doctor, day and night.;
My body isperfect andimperfect andblack andgirl andbig andthick hair andshort legs andscraped knee andhealed scar andheart beating andhands that hold andvoice that bellows andfeet that dance andarms that embrace andmy mommas eyes andmy daddys smile andmy grandmas hope andmy body is masterpiece andmy body is mine.;
There is no room on this planet for anything less than a miracleWe gather here today to revel in the rebellion of a silent tongueEvery day, we lean forward into the light of our brightest designs   & cherish the sunPraise our hands & throats   each incantation, a jubilee of a people dreaming wildlyDespite the dirtbeneath our feetor the windpushing againstour greatest effortsSoil creates thingsArt births changeThis is the honey   & doesnt it taste like a promise?Where your heart is an accordion   & our laughter is a soundtrackFriend, dance to this good songlook how it holds our names!Each bone of our flesh-homes sings welcomeO look at the Gods dancing   as the rain reigns against a steely skylineWhere grandparents sit on the porch & nod at the spectaclein awe of the perfection of their grandchildrens facesEach small discovery unearthed in its own outpourTomorrow our daughters will travel the world with each poem   & our sons will design cities against the backdrops of living museums   Yes! Our children will spin chalk until each equation bursts a familial treeRooted in miraculous possibilities& aliveIllustration by Weshoyot Alvitre;
We ask our childrento act calm/nervous/whateverinnocent looks like whensome cop shows his badge/pulls his gun/slows his car.We beg kidsto say soft yes sirs.We beg kidsto get on the hood of that car/empty their pockets/shut up/put your handsbehind your head.No is an existential threat.No is an existential threat.No is an existential threat.No is an existential threat.Never is an existential threat.Never is an existential threat.Never is an existential threat.Never is an existential threat.We dare ask for humilityin the face of this oppression?We have no idea what the threat feels like,but we knowBreonnaRekiaSandraNiaBettieYvetteMiriamShereeseAhmaudTrayvonEricLaquanMichaelPhilandoStephonAltonAmadouAkaiQuintonioRumaiJohnJordanJonathanReynaldoKendrecRamarleyKennethRobertWalterTerenceFreddieSamuelGeorgeTamirand moreand moreand moreTheres no open wrist declaring our innocence that will confer peacewhere innocents need.Our childrenstand in front of doors/pages/words/in the streets.They shut down/they shut down/they shut downthe forces that burn against them.;
quiet is a mouth i screw onto my mouthquiet, a twin spinning my evilquiet, a snake i hold without flinchingi treat my quiet like a pocket knifequiet, a blade i sharpen and considerready my quiet for any jawquiet, a suspect i bring into questioningquiet, a fire i use for cookingquiet, this country i defendquiet, a law i have writtenquiet, so i am told by every manwho will surely kill mequiet prayer in the mouth of all my victimsi am so quietmice make a simile out of me;
Truth is I would like to escape myself.                  Detach my body from my skin,peel it layer by layer to uncover                  beneath the surface of petalsand thorns piled up year after year,                  who I am and who I want to be.I want to be the flower that grows                  in dirt, the feather that flies free betweenthe cracks of fences. A wise woman                  once told me, dont worry about you,worry about who you could be.                  I want to be the woman who sitson a desk and writes pieces of oceans,                  rivers on a white space in a placewhere imagination has no border.Illustration by Linda Dalal Sawaya;
Summers meant sticking my arm out the back of a rez car.No other windows rolled down.Consequences of a mechanic, some strangerscalloused hands left us with sticky summers, sweatdripping from our foreheads.I waved to make-believefriends and hungry ghosts. My arms dancedagainst the wind, taking comfort inthe resistance of warm desert air.The ghosts sang along as Journeyskeys and bass blared througha battery-powered boombox.The car hugged the highway curves like a childholding its moms hand, afraid to walk alone in the dark.Our grandmothers told us stories of the desert,how giant serpents laid on mountainsto create canyons. Imagine earth crunchingunder the weight of unbearable sadness.Imagine what it feels like to collapseinto an uncharted territory of grief.As young girls we learned the taleof a mother who cried so many tearsshe created a lake in the middle of the desert.Today she sits in stone beneath a star-stitched sky,holding up the otherwise untethered blue.Last month, I read an orca gave birthto a female calf who died thirty minutesafter entering our world. The orca carried her deadcalf for 17 days. Tethered by grief, hers the pricepaid for love and loving.               At 34, my sister gives birthto her first child, a winter-born boy.In recovery, my sister asks if she can walk yet.Her nurse says, Wait until your legs are yours again.I wonder who and what Ive carriedand carry for days, months, for years. Grandmother,take me back to your childhood, where you sangBlue Moon in boarding school, where you wonthe talent show.                    Take me back to 17,when my back first curved into an Sthe serpent inside me coiled under grief,my scoliosis stopping any sportsoutside of prayers and inside dreams.I wish wed had more time.Take me back to the day my fingers learned the bluesuntil chords calloused their tips,the electric progression of Aint Got No Homeetched into my bodys memory.Take me back to when we were all childrengiven songs to sing. The ones you proclaimedwere anthems, predictions for how we would love.Take me back to whenwe were all children sayinglets pretend. Wed yet to swimthrough grief. Our spirits hadnt been crushedby fists breaking through bedroom wallsand I could still hold your hand in the dark.Lets pretend our ghosts have been fed.Lets make-believe our hearts areours so we can walk again.Reverse the journey, playbackthe boombox, rewind the cassette tapeto our favorite part where we all sing along    to the na na na nas,until my lungs can remember what its like to breathein a world where you are still hereand I am still waving at ghoststhrough the back window, singing:now its your turn girl to cry.;
WarWar MotiveWar MarvelWar MotherWar MartyrWar MourningWar MoneyWar MongerWar MurderWar MonsterWar MonsterWar Monster    MonsterIllustration by Jolene (Bean) Nenibah Yazzie;
For Joy HarjoHow to fall asleep easily on the beach, to dig clams, to dream a net made of nettles, a medicine of marsh tea boiled out to the open air, a memory of cedar bark coiled, resting for months in cold water to be fashioned into our so-called lifestyle, clothes for ceremony as well as our dailiness, canoe bailers, diapers, we used the wood for our half-mile longhouse and totems, dried fish, a hard smoke, wooden oval plates that hooked together filled with clear oil of salmon, to wet our palates and smooth our bodies. A shawl of woolly dog (now extinct) they were bred on tiny islands we can still identify, Tatoosh Island off of Cape Flattery, where there were whaling tribes too, the Makah, one of whose villages collapsed, preserved in silt (later unearthed) and how else? Which other ceremonies or necessary edges of objects? Our ivory needles, otter pelts, mat creasers, our dances. What else do you remember dreaming of? A kind of rake to skim the waves, to catch tiny fish on rows of twisted nails.;
Thinkhow many long yearsthis tree waited as a seedfor an animal or bird or wind or rainto maybe carry it to maybe the right spotwhere again it waited months for seasons to changeuntil time and temperature were fine enough to coax itto swell and burst its hard shell so it could send slender rootsto clutch at grains of soil and let tender shoots reach toward the sunThink how many decades or centuries it thickened and climbed and grewtaller and deeper never knowing if it would find enough water or lightor when conditions would be right so it could keep on spreading leavesadding blossoms and dancingNext timeyou seea treethinkhowmuchhopeit holds;
It turns out you can kill the earth,Crack it open like an egg.It turns out you can murder the sea,Poison your own childrenWithout even thinking about it.Goodbye passenger pigeon, onceSo numerous men threw nets over treesAnd fed you to pigs. GoodbyeCuckoo bird who lays eggsIn the nests of strangers.Goodbye elephant birdWho frightened Sinbad.Goodbye wigeon,Curlew, lapwing, crake.Goodbye Mascarene coot.Sorry we never had a chance to meet.Who knew you could wipe outEverything? Who knewYou could crack the earth openLike an egg? Who knewThe endless oceanWas so small?Right now, there are children playing on the shore.There are children lying in hospital beds.There are children trusting us.Who will tell them what weve done?;
I tell Madame Marie about those soldiersand how afraid I am of them.I was afraid of things too,when I was a little girl,  she says.What were you afraid of? I ask her.She closes her eyes and sits for a while in thought,her sewing in her lap.Then she opens them again and licks her threadto sharpen it for her needle.The dark, she says, and big dogs.Oh, I am afraid of the dark and big dogs too, I say,but I am more afraid of the soldiers!Madame Marie\s eyes meet mine.Slowly she nods her head.She understands everything.;
1I am sitting in a cell with a view of evil parallels,Waiting thunder to splinter me into a thousand mes.It is not enough to be in one cage with one self I want to sit opposite every prisoner in every hole.Doors roll and bang, every slam a finality, bang!The junkie disappeared into a red noise, stoning out his hell.The odored wino congratulates himself on not smoking,Fingerprints left lying on black inky gravestones,Noises of pain seeping through steel walls crashingReach my own hurt. I become part of someone forever.Wild accents of criminals are sweeter to me than hum of cops,Busy battening down hatches of human souls  cargoDestined for ports of accusations, harbors of guilt.What do policemen eat, Socrates, still prisoner, old one?2Painter, paint me a crazy jail, mad water-color cells.Poet, how old is suffering? Write it in yellow lead.God, make me a sky on my glass ceiling. I need stars now,To lead through this atmosphere of shrieks and private hells,Entrances and exits, in . . . out . . . up . . . down, the civic seesaw.Here me now always here somehow.3In a universe of cellswho is not in jail? Jailers.In a world of hospitalswho is not sick? Doctors.A golden sardine is swimming in my head.Oh we know some things, man, about some thingsLike jazz and jails and God.Saturday is a good day to go to jail.4Now they give a new form, quivering jelly-like,That proves any boy can be president of Muscatel.They are mad at him because hes one of Them.Gray-speckled unplanned nakedness  stinkingFingers grasping toilet bowl. Mr. America wants to bathe.Look! On the floor, lying across Americas faceA real movie star featured in a million newsreels.What am I doingfeeling compassion?When he comes out of it, he will help kill me.He probably hates living.5Nuts, skin bolts, clanking in his stomach, scrambled.His societys gone to pieces in his belly, bloated.See the great American windmill, tilting at itself,Good solid stock, the kind that made America drunk.Success written all over his street-streaked ass.Successful-type success, forty home runs in one inning.Stop suffering, Jack, you cant fool us. We know.This is the greatest country in the world, aint it?He didnt make it. Wino in Cell 3.6There have been too many years in this short span of mine.My soul demands a cave of its own, like the Jain god Yet I must make it go on, hard like jazz, glowingIn this dark plastic jungle, land of long night, chilled.My navel is a button to push when I want inside out.Am I not more than a mass of entrails and rough tissue?Must I break my bones? Drink my wine-diluted blood?Should I dredge old sadness from my chest?Not again,All those ancient balls of fire, hotly swallowed, let them lie.Let me spit breath mists of introspection, bits of me,So that when I am gone, I shall be in the air.7Someone whom I am is no one.Something I have done is nothing.Someplace I have been is nowhere.I am not me.What of the answersI must find questions for?All these strange streetsI must find cities for,Thank God for beatniks.8All night the stink of rotting people,Fumes rising from pyres of live men,Fill my nose with gassy disgust,Drown my exposed eyes in tears.9Traveling God salesmen, bursting my ear drumWith the dullest part of a good sexy book,Impatient for Monday and adding machines.10Yellow-eyed dogs whistling in evening.11The baby came to jail today.12One more day to hell, filled with floating glands.13The jail, a huge hollow metal cubeHanging from the moon by a silver chain.Someday Johnny Appleseed is going to chop it down.14Three long strings of lightBraided into a ray.15I am apprehensive about my future My past has turned its back on me.16Shadows I see, forming on the wall,Pictures of desires protected from my own eyes.17After spending all night constructing a dream,Morning came and blinded me with light.Now I seek among mountains of crushed eggshellsFor the God damned dream I never wanted.18Sitting here writing things on paper,Instead of sticking the pencil into the air.19The Battle of Monumental Failures raging,Both hoping for a good clean loss.20Now I see the night, silently overwhelming day.21Caught in imaginary webs of conscience,I weep over my acts, yet believe.22Cities should be built on one side of the street.23People who cant cast shadowsNever die of freckles.24The end always comes last.25We sat at a corner table,Devouring each other word by word,Until nothing was left, repulsive skeletons.26I sit here writing, not daring to stop,For fear of seeing whats outside my head.27There, Jesus, didnt hurt a bit, did it?28I am afraid to follow my flesh over those narrowWide hard soft female beds, but I do.29Link by link, we forged the chain.Then, discovering the end around our necks,We bugged out.30I have never seen a wild poetic loaf of bread,But if I did, I would eat it, crust and all.31From how many years away does a baby come?32Universality, duality, totality . . . .one.33The defective on the floor, mumbling,Was once a man who shouted across tables.34Come, help flatten a raindrop.Written in San Francisco City PrisonCell 3, 1959;
for Miles Davis1.a carrier of incandescent dreams thisblade-thin shadowman stabbed by lightningcrystal silhouettecrawling over blues-stained pavements his lifelean he drapes himself his music across edgeshis blood held tight withinstaccato flightsclean as darkness & bright as lightningreversed moments where the sound is two cat eyespenetrating the midnight hours of moon pearls lacingthe broken mirrored watersmississippi mean as a sun-drenched trumpet/manholding dreams held high on any wind/lightvoice walking on eggshells2.& time comes as the wrinklesof your mothers skin shrinking inwardfly towards that compelling voicelight calling since time beganon the flip-side of spirityou shed placentas at each stage of your musicthen go down river exploring new bluesthe drum skin of young years wearing downthe enigmatic search of your musicnow your autumn years of shadows creeping twilightdancers wrapped tight in cobwebs hold onto one anotherbeneath fractured lights cracking the floortheir lives now prismatic poems at the point where the sundisappears with every turning of the clock handsspinning towards the death of lightthere in the diamond pointof the river beyond the edgesthe light glows smallergrows inward becomes a seed to growanother light illuminating the shadowscrystalline as this trumpetmanvoice walking on eggshellsphosphorous as truth or blueas luminescent water beneath the suns eye3.O Silent Keeper of Shadowsof these gutted roads filled with gloomy tickingof time-clocks/razor-bladed turnings of hairpin cornersof these irreducible moments of love foundwhen love was soughtiridescent keeper of rainbow laughterarching out of broken-off gold-capped teethblues man holding the sun between his teethsoothsayer of chewed-up momentsshekereman at the crossroads of cardinal pointstalisman hanging from dewdrops singing deepsea diver of transparent rhythmic poemstrumpet voice walking on eggshellsyour shadow is as the river snake-thinman at flood time blood lengthening in the veinscoursing through the earths fleshshaman man gone beyond the skies limitmusic sleeps there in the riverbedmississippi where those calcified shining bones sleepdeep reminding us of the journey from then to now& from now to wherever it is we have to goso pack your bags boythe future is right around the corneronly a stones throw from yesterdays/lightas is this carrier of afternoon dream musictrumpet voice walking on eggshellsthis eggshell-walking trumpetmanvoice hauntingly beautiful lyrical music mangold as two cat eyes penetrating the midnight hoursas blood blackening the pavement mean music manshadowman holding the night in the bellof his trumpet singingmississippi river pouring from roots of his eyes4.shadowman holding the night in his musicshekereman at the crossroads of cardinal pointselliptical talisman hanging from dewdrops singingdeep sea diver of haunting magical tonestrumpetman walking on eggshellsyour shadow as the river at flood-timesnake-thin shaman man blade-sharp gone beyondthe skys limit music sleeps there in your coursingriver veins curl around the bonesclear as diamond points on waters of sunsetsthere where light grows inwardyour genius moving out from that sourcetrumpetman walking on eggshellsafternoon dreamcarrier of blues in flightsteep night climber of haunting magical poemsjuju hoodooman conjuring illuminating darkness;
1.you begin underneath all that concrete,down inside corridors, labyrinthinetubes that fan out like secret passageways,come together in a place called the pipe gallery,where signs point to danger, no smoking signsbeneath raw sludge sedimentation tanks,where arrows pointing east & west, north & southmove us through corridors, up toward the light,toward the exit sign, up a beveled, flat ramp,stretching like a concrete tongue toward the yellowlight, just above the entranceway, over transparent,soiled, dangling strips of plastic that flaplike madmen waving their tongues & arms in a frenzy,when they are hungry for something, anythingchard eventheir frazzled minds tell them they desirewhen the ocean wind stirs up, speaking in tongues,drum rhythms in waves into rock & sand, craggy shores,tonguing in from the west to tickle the sashaying, dirtystrips that waver, ripple, & move like dancersas they form a kind of doorway you must go through,from here to there, to reach the low, concrete wall,so you can look out to where the water meets sky,& where you are climbing toward now,so you can see the muted, sometimes dazzling light,always suffused with veils of pelting mist that prickyour face looking out as the pacific roars inquick, speaking in tongues, cascading rhythms2.& on a clear day when you move up & out from here,up this concrete tongue that is a ramp, that leads to the topyou move past two gray walls, that form a kind of chute,you move up toward the low, concrete wall,beyond which first you hear, then you see the miraclelaid out before youthe pacific seems so calm, placid evenwhen you cast out your eyes like a fisherman would his line& hooks whatever dream fish he is looking forbut when you look directly down you see the boiling edgesof rage foaming & spitting when the waves show their disappointment,the journey has been spent, now you are beyond the concrete chute,even the man sweeping dirt up the hill, up the concrete tongue,beyond the secret passageways, the labyrinthine tubes,the pipe gallery full of signs pointing in all directions,now you are here, free of all you left behind, out in the open air,you are crossing the street, where before, in this poem,it was all about your imagination, what you thoughtyou would see & hear & now you are here, crossing the streetlike a deer crossing wide-eyed an empty road,out in the middle of nowhere, looking for those dreaded twin lightshurtling toward it, like its mother or father spoke of so many timesbefore& you have come to the precipice to viewthe pacifics mystery & power, stretching out before you now,palm trees on your left & right, seals below, frolickingon large wet rocks, in front of coves,then you see the splendid power of it all, beyond whatyou imagined it would be, out beyond the face of this wall,the waves rolling, speaking in tongues continuously,continuous as your abiding faith has been always ambushed,flabbergasted by the repetition of miracles here, always,like there, right now, in front of your eyes, right now;
for Mildred Howard, Joe Rudolph & Yori Wada1.three shades of blueevoke minnies can do,soo chows, yori wada2.jimbos bop city,john lees boom boom room,history riffing vlue matzoh balls,fried chicken, soba3.the jigoku club insidej town, bold rebels jammingcross from black town, udon,grits, barbecue4.cherry blossoms vloomingin lady days hair, greens & fat back,sashimi staining kimonos5.you walking filmore,crossing geary with duke,street cars running over ghost-tracks,pigfeet in vinegar6.indigo-blue & white,red satin, sticky fingers handlingchops sticks, hot cornbread,sweet potato pie7.memories brought backin a blue mirror, gefilte fish,kimochi, lox & bagels8.filmore auditoriumjamming beneath miles of blue,bird, mink, nihomachi.a fake dividing line9.mixing it all upthis cultural jambalaya stew,kabuki, white linen,silk, coltrane10.music the glue singingnew images of multi-yourapping in the sweet blue air;
He cares for her . . .  He paints lipstick on her lips     as she smiles, waiting      for the train to come        to pick them up         & take them somewhere                              else.Hes brought his lover  a slice of pizza,    which she eats while      concentrating deeply.He speaks softly  to her, while she concentrates                           just so.   Her eyes skate off      in various directions, landing        on inanimate object      The empty bench across                       the platform,       on the other side         a trash bin, not          too far away                       the laces                          on her                       brand new shoes.Both couples plan              for tomorrow, as if       if were a promise,  And their promises fall     on ears so full of hope       they need eyes to glisten off of          while their lips grow full & moist.Ah! That dreamy look       where all love hides    The vacant stare   seemingly to nowhere                    yet, eternally                      a constant stare   Into where everything of mystery     reveals itself in the instance                       of a moment,               before Reality again.And theres the string & string                        that binds us all!  For however we perceive                       Love to be      There it is, in the darkest place        In the bright broad light,                            Obvious and plain          A mystery explained                      that only They, today           Understand the total truth of it. And no one can say    to be the other                wise.;
for my son, Brandon Troupe1.slit balls hung in southern/american winds thenwhen drumheads were slit made mum by rum& songs hung way downaround our ankles bleeding up sun south of alaskaswinging silhouettes picked clean to boneby black crowscaw caw razor scars black-winged crows rippingsunset flights of slashing razorscrows crowsblues caw caws & moans& blues caw caws & moansthen sunsets dangled voicescrowing blues caw caws black crowing razors streaksilhouettes against a frying skillet skybroken necks & sun-gored bodies blistered in eclipsehung nails rope burnedinto sweet black livesrip of pendulum razorslays open the quaking earth of flesh/moansfrom blue-black dues paying womendropping embryos into quicksandafrican secret songs strapped across blood-stained bladesof glittering american razorssongs of sun/down flesh karintha dusk fleshdrug through spit/rippedbleeding up sun south of alaskableeding up sun south of alaska2.& crows & razors & ropes & bulletscrows & razors & ropes & bulletsthe shared cold legacy& crazed pale men lassoing the sun out of the sky& darkness then bleeding up sun south of alaskacrow wings covering the sky & our eyes & their eyes tooeclipsing the face of the sunnow an invisible clock with laser-beamed handsthat are branding rays burning our fleshreducing over time to bone/dustkissing stone but the nature of stoneis not moved by the tongue of heat enteringthe mouth of our livespassionate sweet touch of meaningbut still we moved through space towards gracecarrying a sphinx in one eyea guitar in the other knowing that time is alwaysin the possession of the keeper3.so now son blackroll the pages of your american eyes back sonblack son roll them back black son americanson way way back sonback before the sun ripped your flesh hereway way back sunfor the pages of your eyes carry the memory sonthey are blue-black pages dues pages fingers strummingmusic of oral history songs griot songsafrican songsstrong black strumming fingers sonamerican black lives as humming caw cawsblack crows transformed into eaglesno matter ripping suns sonno matter slit drums/tongueswe are here sonare sun music spirit soncaw caw blues razorskeepers of secret guitars;
you begin with a sound wrapped around a syllable, or syllables,a word (or words) like razzmatazz, or ratamacue, then you listen toa red-boned black man playing a horn like a clue,like a train or john coltrane or bird, then you play around with soundsyour ears done heard, lift them off a rebound spellbound inside a rue,because of a cue your memory remembered & knew.                                now you add a few nouns & vowels,words singing like birds, flying through a spring wind thunder clapping,       with roiling, rolling consonants, their feathers echoing colors nowblack or white or blue, as a ranky dank pressing flesh beneath themwas immune to trailing blues stretched out behind him,voices that flew rhythmic as queued soundtracks through the nightssweet longing, choo-chewing like wailing engines hurtling down isolated                tracks, way out in the dead of nights hushed music,        around the voodoo, bewitching hour of bats, who like wordsbruising from a crew of mad hatter good old boys were circling insidea hushed cave, where a strange blend of language was fashioning itself nowfrom cries & screams, the whooshing of beating wingsdrumming pell-mell clues through       the dark cinematography of a dream bordering on nightmare,as it wraps itself around you now as would a cocoon,you find yourself there inside the cave of your head& you are whatever it is you think you are there, brand new,you are what you believe in as truth, right then, right there,when you hear sheets of sounds rushing out of the bell of a saxophone,it is a stomp down cornucopia of magic spiraling out of a dream,from a golden axe, shaped like an elephants trunk, the shape of need hereis a question mark bewitching us with breath, power, mystery, stealth,is what new language is shaping itself into now inside the neon airhip-hopping & rapping in voice rhymes of young people,before us right now is what the minds ear reminds the tongue of here,chasing the sound of a freight train moving at full speed, is a syntax,a jackety-jack of wheels rolling through the slick flow of tracks bedazzling gears,the song of it all beguiling us with amazement, the rackety-rack of steel spinningover & down rails, underground or overground, tracks,                               the sound we hear is real when we know itcoming from the terrifying mystery of a hip shamans horn,we see the music form in the shape of the hot tongue of a bic flame lightertonguing out gushed heat,          flames as sounds, as words inside the scorched flow of lava,inside a tongue that is red, white, & blue, laced with dues paid in philadelphia, in hamlet, north carolina, where a language was fractured there,congealed, until it hopscotched itself to its own back beatconundrum, before it pealed across the air clear as a bell ringing coldon sundays, unleashed a rage in rhythm & tempo, heated voices in sermons,became a fire there in flight, was volcanic with syllables aglow, the nightflaming with embers washing through the breeze like a tribe of firefliesswarming the night sky, a voice pure & guttural,       a primal scream looping clues of prophecy here, blue,or sweetly singing as a slew of birds          tracking across a fondued sky laced with magenta,their music heard in ringing silver bells as the wind tongue trills melodicas it breezes lilting languages through chiming leaves tremblinglike lovers in heat/time, when the air is all aglow & splendiferouswith greens, yellows, & golds,                bright reds of bougainvilleas,jacarandas fragrant as voices of doves cooing, sweet pink of flaringrhododendrons that burst into shapes of trumpet bells evokingmiles playing muted live in memory, clean as a whistle,is where a poet stretches rubber sentences into bridges of music now,language reinventing itself daily out of lost & found words,constructing what it is to speak as a true american here,today, right now, words moving through poems as magicians through parades,clowns dressed up as verbs, adverbs, adjectives surrounding nouns with brightverve, reminds the senses of sweet odor of frangipani perfume,rhymes & rhythms intoxicating the senses,this moment sluicing across the air in a rainbow of races,seductive with music, images moving quickly as faces in an mtv video,across screens blazing fast as beats moved through bebop, urban slickas hip-hop brothas chilling wicked in blooming fubu color schemesrad in baggy jeans, their hand jive flicking & stabbing the air, constantly blur-               ring imagesblink & theyre gone like pop goes the weaseltheir rhythms nicking edges off slick time in stop-gap measures,voices locking & leaking into currency, flip & zip,can-you-dig-it, inside blaring boxes clocking back beats stitching threadsthrough the culture of hip-hop, attitudes holding everything together there,as when a guitar player picks blaze out of funk noise,his cadence up inside & outside time,as in this poem swinging its voice downwind to cross fragile bridgesstrung together with cadences & words, structures underneathform the bass-groove swaying back & forth over deep chasms,between mountains of language, where a child hears vocabulary in a swing,in the backyard of a favorite uncle waxing real with his sho-nuff-to-god,hope-to-die-ace-boon-coon-throw-downs,                       the ones that always got his back each & everytime he smacks scary, wherever he goes, their attitudes high-fivin their eyes& everything silent here except the winds screaming terror,words trying to cross over to the other side, to where the nephew swings,               right here, right now, words flowing through seamlessas eye (w)rap my tongue around a bridge of johnny ace or nat king colestitching together a profusion of sweet cadences franksinatra & elvis stole, words that breathe inside a living language full of colors,as choirs of birds singing atop hot telephone wires carry arethas gospel,a symphonic elocution of elegant voices,        a cecil taylor bedazzlement of lyrical, discordant chords,swinging double-bladed axes cutting down trees as they slice through all thisblue air, the bird still singing now over steel trackssnaking through & in between landscapes, where tupac & biggie now sleepbeside coaltrain(s) blowing through the nights voodoo air, sweetthe feeling here now, still blue as you were charlie parker,& truly american as slow trains choo-chooing twelve bar bluesthrough your old stomping ground of kansas citys twelfth & vine,where you first showed your razzle-dazzle,       your feathers spreading their beauty through wind-chimesaching with your soliloquizing voice, always on edge,triple-timing the fire that flowed through your genius ire on time,until a chicken bone stuck itself inside your throat & damned up your music,(like that legendary finger stuck in that dike did to tupac, did to biggie, too)pure smack snaking venom through your veins,in a deadly slow dance with death you stumbled & scratched,poisoned your brain until your head nodded off for real, then the bells tolled,but boy did you jam, jam, boy did you jam until you left, no sweat, boy did youjam, jambo, jambalaya, gumbo, boy did you jam jam, boy did you jam& play that horn for real before the pain jammed vomit in your throat,left those hot cadences cold as methuselah,fire bird of stricken-heat, chicken-gumbo boy of sound language, boy,did you jam, jam, boy did you jam, boy did you jam, jam, boy did you jamriffs run through scales & chords, inverting electriceverything you heard you turned inside out, structures,blew past every note& through them, toorooted them in your own blue expression of turn everything inside out,you jambo, gumbo, chicken-liver boy, running up & down jambalaya scales,pastiche, a coaltrain before coltrane blew down the hushed voodoo night,a coaltrain burning across flat plains of kansas city, flight & barbecuesauce up in the flavor of your drenched hot giddiup, scorching as red pepperchili sauce, yo boy of bebop phrasing in groovin high, you blew:bebop, bebop, beedoo beeboli, doodle-li, bebop, bebop,beedoo beeboli, doodle-li, bebop, bebop,beedoo beeboli                               bop baw baw baw bo de baaaaaaaaa daaaaaaa . . . . . . . .& you ran it all the way to new york city, mintons & birdland,chicken eating boy turned hip man skeedaddleing choochooing chords,so fast the air could hardly digest them, not to mention some humanears, playing salt peanuts, salt peanuts,you & diz beautiful beyond words tradin fours in duet,fours in traffic, boppin and rappin before tupac & biggie were even bornbird, you uptown in harlem creating language that reinvented itself again& again before rap seduced rhythms down to scratching old records & words,skating over samples of james brown & george clinton, toasting & roastingthe language like you & diz did in a dizzy atmosphere, jamminbeedle-loo-beedle-loo-beedle-loo-bop,beedle-loo-beedle-loo-beedle-loo-bop,beedle-loo-beedle-loo-beedle-loo-bop,beedle-loo, beedle-loobeedle-loo-beedle-loo-beedle-loo-bop,beedle-loo-beedle-loo-beedle-loo-bop,beedle-loo-beedle-loo-beedle-loo-bop,beedle-loo, beedle-loowords & sounds building bridges toward a new tongue,& it all started back in africa, mixed with europe over here, everything else,found itself here, too, in this gumbo stew, jambalaya,this salad bowl filled with all kinds of flavors,this pastiche, collage of language reinventing itself every day,every moment giving itself props, wherever words arespoken, patch themselves together with sound, form a sentence,that becomes a musical line perhaps lifted from armstrong, bird, or milesa phrase snatched & grafted into language of tupac & biggie, buzzingin the attitudes of alanis morrisette or jamiroquai scattingphrased metamorphosed into dance when he reaches backto grab hold of a language to swing & singtoday, in this moment in time, when everything is evolving,right now, from cue tips of tongues, a new languageis waiting for you to discover listener, for you to give it some props,to speak it, wrap your tongue around it, roll it off your assembly line of newexpressions too, so give it up for the new, right here, right now, so speak it,dont diss it, give the new some props right now,freak it out with your owndash of flavor,                say whats up in the air as sound, nowknow its rooted & shaped in the vortex of truth-change,constant with language & words, sounds & attitude now,say whats birthing in the womb of air, nowsay whats birthing in the womb of air, now:bustin on the scene clockin banji beastie boys actin like fiends:down with the fave, funky jam, the noise up in the legitjack up, someone screaming to kill the ill funky noise living large,with an ace keepin it real, poppin the rip, doin the nasty to the bumpbreakdown in the bricks, where the homies roll bonesto clock dollars, chillin hard through the calendar, gangstas flexinprofiles, while they kick it on the real decked in doo-d00 pantssaggin slow like low riders over their doggy-gripsas they watch aces ball with the pill takin it hard to the rack,skyin down the box, risin up the god to deal, or flash for the count,pumpin treys from downtown, nothin but netswords that build bridges toward a new tonguebeedle-loo-grab-a-groove-drop-some-slick-talk,jazz-a-phrase-pop-a-blues-new-as-hip-hop,cruisin-through-rapping-clues-sprung-from-bebopme-&-you, grooving throughme-&-you, groovin throughme-&-you, singin new . . . . .;
Again on this night like the previous at Lampedusaa nondescript heart would openits hands to the disposable peopleIn the scramble and howl of outrageits hands would be overloadedTen centuries of brotherhoodThese hands sing Esperantowith the solemn tone of a requiemBut the hands are nothing more than desireled astray across shipping lanesThat hearts hands have received a missionto carry mankinds dreams across the open seaand here distracted by seasicknesshave become immobile;
sweet sour falls simpler into the mouthremains behind the teethwhere only sweetnessmay be rememberedmay burrow cavitymay swallow youfrom the insideof your own mouthmay pour honey overall the absencesmay coat cinnamon overall the abscessesmay grow too bigmay throw you outmay replace all the things you knowwith sugarmay make emptysugarlonely could rot your teethlost love may make you sickthese are lipsand these are names;
The field has ceased to be lush wonder, from the eyes of a bird I watched them go again and again, horns finding the softness behind fur. Here, what seek for death is been praised. Young boys jump into the air to know the weightlessness of joy. Every year they come here to know death, to know the last sound of a dying animal is a plea for the knife. I looked from above, sending back the spirit of dead animals into the bodies of little boys. We were never too young to know the tongues of kites are beginnings to rituals and when these boys begged to be set free from seeing a horn spill blood on grasses, what do they mean? We all must know death to know the sadness of a grave.Again, another ram is led to the center, a whistle is heard, another ram is allowed to walk through. The sun kept shining, faithful witness to every war, to every broken horn, to every animal whispering for death. Another ram is fallen. Abdul turned to me, the knife in his hand ready to run through the rams neck is an act of mercy.This is the ritual of war I was given. In a train in Boston I tried to hide in a book while an old woman kept saying I write for Africa, as if Africa is a little bowl of water, as if our tongues are not divided by borders. She turned to me to say you must know about conflict zones. Even when invisible, I am asked about the origin of war. I opened my palm to spill a rams blood on her seat. This is what I know, a ram will look death in the eye and run towards it just like a man walking into the night with the weight of a continent on his back.;
The woman on the bar stool knows your bodyis a journey into songs,the door into a moth flirting with fire,which means theres a pretty boyliving under your skin.I do not wish to come to youbut I cant help it,you look drunk like a manseeking a way out of himselfor a way into the beginning of his voice.The city knows how to kill a man like youand on the face of some menI can see you burning.Tonight, you take your first step into music,saying your body knows how to beat a paththrough hell and back,saying angels do not die in songyou are daring like a throat accepting the fire of tequila.Across you in a dark booth, I want to screamsilently. Do not dance,do not give in to the wild beat flowing through your heart.But you are dancing like a boy drowning insidehis blood and all my bodycan do is pray your soul into a birds wingsand hope the wind call you home.Do you know the first thing about fire?Have you seen a mouth calling Godonly to find a body rising in smoke?The city does not wantto hear your song flowing through a bird,they dont want you dancing in the light.Come into the dark before a mangreets your body with violence.Come into dark, let me singthe night through your bodylike a man learning how to worship Godin a strange land.;
Theyll say you are wrongto think of it as warwhen what you saw wasonly flailing, half illumined in the flares.Theyll point to problems with the light,say you cannot trustthe conjuring habit of the hands and eyesthat appear to belie stories of the day.Under the swinging bulb as figures come and gothe face close to your facewill say the trains now run again,factories increasetheir output, bodies even glistenon the beach again.Then later theyll say yes, admittedly our citysemptied of your friends and colleaguesand the pumps run dry at times, and yesthat was dark smokemassed above the mall last Saturday.But how much more ridiculousyoud seem, huddled on the ice, elsewhere entirely,with a new name, a fake accent,clutching photographs that prove or disprove nothing.And is there not a thrill in knowing that the footagesome will queue to seeis from a neighborhood like yours?In the sirens and the flags, the beat of helicopter rotors,the corner men in camouflage?And you perhaps among the black carsracing bumper to bumper at dawntoward the palace?;
silence begets the girlor a sink hole churnsin the womxns womband a girl is bornin flight modewith a tongue in throatand dead air in the eyesunmoving and opaquescolding menwith her audacity for stillnessnot voicelessnessquiet currenta numbness you must consent toone you must knuckle underat willan omission of defenserefusal to warto acknowledgethe violence of his presencethis is how to give birththe girl is born for the sake of silenceor silence is born for the girlthis is how to make lovemen must runsomeone should tell themthat a quiet tideswallows you all the samethe girl will not say nothe girl will not say anything;
They all cling to remainsof safety in this truck careeningtowards Sabha in Libya.They crowd the back,shrouded in a half lighthaloing their bodiesthe broken windowsopening into Asmara,Raqqa, Darfur, and othercathedrals of war.When they collate their aches,it is in whispersa longing to break this ruse,the pact between the smugglersand songbirds governingthis region,the insistence of gusts sweepingthe desert.Too frail to bear the angst,the kids on board are crying.They are asking their parentsif they will make it,if they all wont be soldbefore they get to Sabha,or Tripoli, where they canmake for the waters.But the adults are hesitant.They know they could be sold,they could get caughtby the guards who would shoutemshi emshi,deporting them back to Agadez,to those camps where comradeswho have failed in this quest reside,often staying awakein full moons,mourning dreams forgone.;
O Eritrea Id fill the hornNew signs to banish those spells that gore fateId punch the horn full of fraternal notesa harmony to deplete the archaic songsThey are always of discordpowdery rhythmics in which verse and chorustoss life into the pastureinto the ground into the sandOnly the sea can erase our boot prints in the clayor destroy the sandcastleAlready determined by bloodthe earth has eaten its childrenThe sea does not tell mewhat is has donestretching its tonguejust a few lengths from Lampedusa;
The oil spill would advanceeating whole pieces of white breadTeeth rotten the spill swallowsthree-quarters of the breadand the crumbs loosenlike a knot of intestineThe tide would slideits slum water and seaweedacross the waters white bodyWithout a visa the blackened tideis not even recognized by the skyConvinced by the shushing wavesthat all will be savedthe spill throws itself across the seaBut the bread does not like the nibbling at its torsodoes not want its sides to be grazed like thisThe bread begins shouting outthat it opposes such a race of teethBlacks on this tide have a laughare fed up with being fed to the seahave a laugh as lines disappear from the rainbowlaugh at the puddle of drool on the white bodyof the white bread;
My body reaches down into a bottle of ginto make a world out of something close to death.We were never meant to be alive,to be 25 and a chandelier brokeninto a million fragments of light.Father allowed the bees escape from the beehive.Heres the sting, heres the sound of fear,heres your fathers face carved into the daybreaking the world across your back,heres all his memories burning down your bones.The wound hurts in its softest part.During the war a father saved the severed headof his daughter, he talked to it until a rottenhead talked back.Heres your fathers head in your bosom,Heres your mouth begging for love,for his tongue to show you a way home.Heres your father saying you cant teacha dead man how to love.All the rivers come into you,which means water is never enoughto save a man falling from the sky.I have learnt to love every broken thingthe way a man learns to live with a memory that doesnt die.I have learnt to carry my fathers body in my heart like a sonthat inherits a knife cut without flinching.;
my mother undressesby accidentshe pours herself outand i catch herwith my mouthdown the desert hallwayin my throatshe finds a bodyi borrowed onceby accidenti have my motherin my lungsmy grandfather breaksout of his torsoonto the floormy grandmother tripsover himshe bleeds outinto my mothers earmy mother has her motherin her windpipea magicianshe smokes herselfinto a potionmy mother has drunkin her nosei am sorry i am hungovermy mothers bodyis intoxicatedi stumble out in my sleepand you tuck me back inby accidentyou undress meand all the alonefalls out;
Imvepi refugee settlement, UgandaAgain, a child is the missing letterin this algebra of grief,slips out of the company of broken menfurling into a country of themselves.I watch him meld into the loop of kidsgathered around a relief truckin a procession of songs.They join arms, hopping.It is how they teach a quiet return to love,these kids shedding weightstheir bodies became too frail to bear.Their litanies echo in the dark,beseeching days ahead to be kinder.;
Sorry, I assumed you were awake anyway.Lets try it without the heavy breathingtoward the end of the scene in the garden.It distracts, somehow. Just speak the words, thereand elsewhere, as loudlyor as quietly as they need to be spoken.Need in this context is vague, but do your best.Dont get me wrong, subtlety is not the goal,not on our budget, but an untested intensitywill flounder somewhere between the prompterand the first row of the audience.They know the story too, after all,and it will be late by the time you face them.Dont gaze into the distance when thefuture is referred to. Dont hopewhen you speak of hope.Presumably its not easy being usbut consider the alternatives.Have you looked around recently?In scene four you are passing an empty bowl aroundthat must seem heavy, but overdothe heaviness and its emptiness is the finallingering effect. Do you see what I mean?I mean use the sharp knives carefully.I mean real tearsdont mean youre acting well, just that youve lostyourself in yourself again,and where the script says screama step to the side and possibly a fingertouched to the mouth will do.;
After AsaThe room smelled of sex,marijuana and cough syrup.The soft voice of Asafilled my ears.He said, blue birds are the children of the sea.I smiled, my foot tappingto the rhythm of Asas lyrics.He whispered into my ear Satan be gone.as he tried to find a way into my skin.I tried to tell him Im the beautyof roads and rivers,I tried to tell him Im the feather of a birdleading a man to drown under the sea.His first bite was a manlearning the secret of soft words,his second bite was a trip wirein the breast of a manlearning how sex is a roomfull of drugs where a man meets his fear.He said, Satan be gone,as he folded his tongue into my mouth,as his fist found the softest partbetween my ribs,as I became the angel Jacob fought withas he tried to find home between two names.He said, Satan be gone,as he cried in my mouth,as he understood the beauty of the night,as his fingers carved a memorial on my skin,as my body became a wombfilled with blood and lightand a man finds the beginning of a journeyis also a door to fire.He said, Satan be gone,as his fist hit me again and againbefore his body crawled into a wounded animalat sleep,as I staggered into waterand prayed that water and tearswould wash the blood flowing down my mouth.;
The refrain of this watersays something is imminent,says loss is upon us.Bordered by kelpbrown murals supple as wooland a cloud of winged witnesses,our boat is somewherein the middle of the Mediterranean,miles and miles from the coastnear Tobruk in Libya,where we had campeduntil the smugglers and the seaspoke of its fidelity.It was a soft, fluid tune:the tender draw of waterthe sea, keen, humminga promise of calm,urging us to draw closer,to unlearn all we thought we knewabout the posture of water.There are dismembered boat parts,whole dinghies, too,shooting out from somewherebeneath this expanse,yielding us to catalogsof told and untold mishaps the seas unfulfilled promisesto those who had knocked on its door,those who sought to know its ways:the Nigerian boycomforting his sister,after they lost their mothermiles away from Sabratha,and those with whomwe had camped at the coast,the ones who drowned overnightsome hundred milessouth of the island of Lampedusa.What binds us,in this boat, is a known fear,a kinship of likely loss,the understanding that we, too,could become a band of unnamed migrantsfound floating on the face of the sea.;
in which a freed slave revisits the Zong massacreWith eyes that have knownabysses, ruin, and the soft,untold ways of water,he would search the skyand its mileage of lights for a star or two,distinct in formmuezzins as they wereto call us to the essence of each night.He would start in that space of timewith a glide, yielding us to themany scenes of rust each sigh, a resurrectionof unspeakable things.And he surely does it well,leading us, in that pitch of memory,into the deep of each moment.Now, he is speaking of Zong,the memories, its handlers as well,that voyage across the Atlantic,from Accra to Black River,Jamaica, circa 1781.In our maniaand the fluid of his lore,something, strong as mojo,speaks to us, catechising our humanity a percussion of love.Perched on the ensuing hushis something beyond us,something outpacing the pulseof this night and its music of cicada.So we are thinking of lives,in aggregates, beyond digits:The 208 slavesthat made it to Black River.Those 54 women and childrenbegging to be spared, screaminginto that November dark.The drowned men, too79 in all,names hiddenin the directories of the sea.;
So early its still almost dark out.Im near the window with coffee,and the usual early morning stuffthat passes for thought.When I see the boy and his friendwalking up the roadto deliver the newspaper.They wear caps and sweaters,and one boy has a bag over his shoulder.They are so happythey arent saying anything, these boys.I think if they could, they would takeeach others arm.Its early in the morning,and they are doing this thing together.They come on, slowly.The sky is taking on light,though the moon still hangs pale over the water.Such beauty that for a minutedeath and ambition, even love,doesnt enter into this.Happiness. It comes onunexpectedly. And goes beyond, really,any early morning talk about it.;
Imagining another person is like writing my diary in poetry.We don\t know each other, but the same demon possesses us both,like we\re playing a game before they carry out our destructionA competition between idiots  nobody knows its delights.Here, I denounce his Puritanism,and he doesn\t go easy on my poor taste or bad logic.With each sentence, we loathe each other a bit more, become a bit more intimate.He is warm in the inter and cool in the summer, has never eaten sesame on lettuce,if he\s been in love I\m sure it was with a chunk of quicklime.Night. A bit of faint blue rules over madness and reason.I carry my computer over the bridge, pray for rain with the chrysanthemums,I am with them and with them, the moist mountain range sprouts an endless white beard.Sometimes uh-oh between us there appears a vague you!In the mirror, I write a string of letters and then wipe them lightly away:you\re fucking awesome. You rub your hands and bright, resilient space        goes warm!;
how many ways can you disappeara people, dignity by dignity, slantword by slant word, who turn grave,grave by grave by the curve and measureof graves after typhoons, cyclones,the mounting electrowastelands by the fresh-water, and wrath of tumours as brightbrush on the forehead or covering over knees,the work of minutes grating againstmillions in flooded citieswhat garments I wrap this zealous hand insteering east all through the night, comethe morning I will not be long enough &patient enough to level the quick word, a-way out how many ways can you emptya people, hope by hope, I do not veneratemen. at. all. I have a problem with dream;
Out here in the sticksYou rarely encounter such genius:Come, come, come to Taiwan UGo, go, go to the USWords passed with envy from mouth to mouthGiving the hometown high hopesThen I heard you\ve become an American citizenYou\re very busyWith house paymentsCredit cardsYou rarely have time to write homeYou must know unspeakable hardshipAt home, motherIs busy as alwaysCovering our tuitionDoing never-ending farm work        season after seasonFor you to study abroad andLeave the family in debtYou ought to remember        at the end of the year you leftFather, who struggled all his lifeIn wind and rain, in sorching sun and bitter coldDied in a car accidentLeaving all life\s difficultiesTo mother, who can\t even readFor more than ten years,        From morning till nightOur illiterate motherHas had so muchShe wanted me to write and tell youhow she worried about youAnd I ought to tell youEvery time there\s a wedding in the villageMother insistsI write your nameIn the registerBecause you are the eldest sonOur older brotherYou left your backward hometownMore than ten years agoTo become an American citizenIn every airmail letter homeYou express your disappointment and angerAt your unsuccessful brothers and sistersYes, we\ve all disappointed youYou\re ashamed of usLike this small plot of landThis stupid plot of landWhich provides you no sense of pride or gloryBecause we are unwilling to studyThose proud ABCsWe\re only willing to work, struggle and sweat in silenceIn our homelandI heard you\ve become an American citizenYou\re very busyYou must have suffered great hardshipI don\t know if you miss mother        The way she misses youShe\s growing older thinking about youDo you ever think aboutThe potatoes we ate as kids?They were cheap and tastyI don\t know whyYou are so busy in that foreign landAnd for whom1978;
Whose own mother left themthree years ago, whose father cares for them nowthough barely, it is said, always ill-fittingschool uniforms and dirty casual clothes,who do no sports, and owning nothingare impossible to punish.The school and the suburb knows it.Too young for banishment they mustbe accommodated yet might run amok,say we couldnt help ourselves,mutilations in our blood.How could they, motherless, ever knowwhich versions of themselves shouldtake precedence? How could they learnto want what it is possible to have?In the rain my mother drives me to school butthere they are at the bus stop, mopingin regulation school-gray rain jackets.A lift cant be offered, consider their likely wetnessand their intractablegroup lumpiness, the three of themdripping there in the backseats,struggling with seat beltsand where to put their bags,and the dank smell of them in the tight car.Would they speak in unison, like angels?Would they have a chosen speaker, and if sowould they confer before responding?In whispers or by silent looks?Or would they speak independently in strange grunts,produce a chaotic babble thatcould not be quieted?It is inexplicable, how they keep to themselves,how quietly they play, seriousand strong-shouldered and ineffectual as birds,even now by the canal, as though unobserved,unhated, as though they will not die of bullets andfast moving cars and needlesin rooms in other cities, scattered,die of their own sheer unbelongingthe way I would if I were them.;
The cardiac bang bang of literary fame and the bruising after,you bang bang bang, I bruise for no reason at all.A good guy, perched on the excavator, extends its metal armsand the moment of exposure, of shamecondensed into a twinkling, lasts almost forever!The summer dew writes back, says youre still not cryptic enough.Fury has many categories: flattering, pinned in tight bun,streaming cat piss, unaggrieved, engrossed by the broken soul . . .Does the glittering system encourage weakness?The fish bone chorus erupts, it shatters the land but sticks in the throat.Whats most serious must be prophesied correctly before it happens.Swashbuckling heroism? Havent seen it in ages. On heaven and earthsmakeshift chopping block, you can use fir, white oak, red pine . . .Spirit and the flesh, sliced until theyre so lean!;
Right now perhaps you\re holding a horse by the bridle.Perhaps you\re with someone, the lights still on.Is there any more freedom than in the word dearth?I don\t even know whether this is a poem or a diary.In my whole life I only loved one womanwith nonfilial love. Inside my mouth there\s anindescribable movement, most likely unattractive,like an spasm. When the pencil falls from your hands.It\s not that I\ll never seesixteen again, nor even thirty.But something\s been breached. The book of coldness writtensmoothly, like the defendent\s bench.When Van Gogh was dying, his lastwords were said to be sorrow will last forever.That could be anyone\s epitaph.The eternal has its own laws.;
from resurrection to sundaywe cross off dates on the calendarwaiting for salvationin comes in the form of mountain airin the gas chamber of a citysilvery antsdrag along up to the stone heightrub against steel sidesitchingtracks left on the neck from a narrow gateunder quilted clouds;
The rain came down all day.The drops clattered against the iron benchesand Chekhov, ill, sitting on some sort of old-fashioned sofa,came to mind.That long day I never got out of bed.I felt weighed down by the sleeping pill, like a cloud.Theres a limit to everything, it seemed to me.But love passed and even yearning faded,like a jackal baring her teeth in anticipation.In sum, nothing remained just my room.The rain poured down it got dark.And suddenly the whistle of a night train slashed through meand I started to cry.Because words cant say it.;
So today I tried to write againabout the most important things the enormous sunrising beyond the smokestacks.The crimes of the entire nation.And the twisted throat of a songbirdaccomplishing its daily heroics during an argument.But I couldnt get a line by Elena Shvarts out of my head:the heart is like a punching bag,pounded from the inside.    *Elena Shvarts Russian Poet (1948-2010);
Plant a tree in place of a gravePlant a patch of trees in place of a cemeteryPut a flowerbed around each treeLay the ashes of the deceased to rest by the stumpBuried or scattered among the flowersSurrounded by mourning friends and familyHands clasped in remembrance, contemplation, and farewellRemembrance need not be the timeRelegated to the Tomb-sweeping FestivalCome together and water the treePress close to it, caress it, hug itPerhaps youll hearThe deceased still at your side, earnestly and sincerely exhort youDont forget to enjoy the good sceneryWhen the wind rustles leaves and branchesA flock of birds hopping and singing in the treetopAs if offering greetingsSunlight, stars and moon provide companyThe trees are in touch with each otherAs if the memories of the deceasedLinked with each other undergroundNew and tender shoots sprout contentedlyEach affirming the fruit of cultivationSouls moored at the foot of each treeResting peacefully, continue to growRegardless of how far they goTheyll return by the original roadTo the cherished memories of friends and family2005;
when the memory is not the same and hands are not the samewhen an animal wakes up in your bellya light bulb goes dim in your heada voiceborn in the cavityof one who might grow out of yousomething was really unluckyaskswhat day is it?;
Here is where river and seaMeet in loving-kindnessFiddler crabs, New Guinea mudskippers, far-eastern curlews,               corn crakesThe wetlands stage where dazzling performances unfoldHome where the egret plucks out its foodThe white dolphins near-shore corridorOn this land, generations of farmers and fishermenHave wiped away their sweat and enjoyed the cool breezeGreeting the tides! Ebbing and flowingHistory forms on the mudflatsTransient and mesmerizing ripplesThe openness permits us a far-off gazeEnough for us to set our hearts freeTo feel the insignificance of lifeAnd the insignificance of interestsWill future generations on this island haveThe chance to experience?A petrochemical plant known as KuokuangIs pressuring the anxious and aggrieved west coastThe last remaining mudflats and wetlandsA banner known as construction flutters shamelesslyAgainst the seaport windWith the pressure of imminent development, it looks likeThe coastline will soon be closed, shutting off our viewThe pristine view replaced with smokestacks, oil spills,         and dust filling the skyFor the benefit of a fewIt looks like our water resources will be divertedWith drought as the result for usIt looks like you, the silent masses, will soon vanishNot to mention the New Guinea mudskipper, fiddler crabs,                 and corn crakesNot to mention the egrets and white dolphinsAnd the farmers and fishermen.All for the slogan of prosperityHow should we reportThe environmental impactAssessment?And all I can do is write a poemHow I wish my versesCould be smelted into bulletsSited into insatiable brainsOr forged into bladesTo pierce the expanding breasts of greedBut thats not possible. All I can do is bear itWriting a sad and useless poemSwallowing unrivaled worry and sadnessMy verses are not bullets or bladesThey frighten no oneNor know to whom they should kowtowThey can only fill syllables and lines with tearsOne recited after anotherOne after another, shouting to Heaven and Earth2010;
On the telly, hundreds of Moscow denizensare pulling down the statue of Felix Dzerzhinsky,the father of the KGB, while an American reporterintones that what we\re seeingis the Death of Communism celebration,that great day when the Russian people found outthat nobody owns history.I thought I was the only onewho was mourning for Communism  then Italked to Larry Fagin as we walked throughColdwater Canyon Park                     and he said that he mourned too,and so did his wife, Susan Mustard. It was the last good   and great idea,the last time we brought credit to the species,that we could shake off our shackles,and our mind-forged manaclesand let the good times roll.                    Karl Marx at his table in thereading room at the British Museum, poring through a stack of lit,probing for the pulse of history, the instant that we wrote the words:From each according to his means, to each according to his needs,did he already see in his mind\s eye that some day his formulawould be swept away?Now we live in the Corporate state and we better not get used to it.According to our patrons, from here on outit\s dog-eat-dog. The Peruvian minerand the Detroit engine worker will beat each other\s throats  sleeping in their Dodge RAMsout beyond the shadows the gas flares throwinto the defeated dust,waiting for those with the wherewithal to dineto toss off a scrap of food.By the time Dzerzhinsky foundedthe Bolshevick secret police,Communism was dead alreadyand lying in state.Maybe that\s why it feels like there\ssuch a dearth of Communism around here tonight there\s not enough loveto make our world go around.;
         Every time I see something Beautiful   I fuck it up                And bring it to you;
The godless dance out rather than speak out.The betrayal of love is its own reason for being, but somesee reward as its own punishment. The dead angel is the hard linesyou feel upon you. The way of the cremated leads through earth.We are the burnt offerings.The mother had to conceive them.The father had to deliver them. The concrete thingis the blind man who leapt into the fire laughing.I don\t want to bethe dead body of that blind man.I am in the fire.Fire is spread through the church,the church rings with cries,hearts sing with fire,the fire spreads through joy,through great overpoweringexplosions of love, light pours out of the congregation.;
Just to say that todaythe female power is revealedby the blue sky flappingin the laundryon the roof across the street.I refer, of course,to the quiet study and theempty bed. The headwould be ruled by the heart today,and by the sidewalkdrifting up to me as laughs.Like the flowersby your house today at noon,you open up as we talk,and Im by your side.;
I am the spirit of the dead African man lost in the Atlantic during storms and murders crossing those terrible waters during the Middle Passage. My spirit though mixed in a mlange with blood of Cherokees and the spirits of Tom Ridge Tom Ross the Apache warrior Geronimo the Sioux Chief Sitting Bull and the Shawnee Chief Tecumseh and his younger brother Tenskwatawa the one-eyed prophet and a whole lot of others. I rise up out of the ground outof the rivers walk and cut through mist fog tornado clouds hurricane winds come out of the ground from cracks of earthquakes the flaming lava of volcanoes and come here to this Mississippi River not far from Cahokia where the ancestors came upriver from the gulf and built those pyramids there to spite the white man. So I double/cross through the upside-down question mark of this here shining steel arch down here on the levy of Sad Louis and emerge from behind the polished steel and come out to greet you here to bring you a message but I can see you aint ready yet so eye done changed my mind and Im gon walk back through the roiling rolling fog and mist until you ready to talk to me righteously because I am the voodoo spirit of African Indian double-take of cross-fertilization here in this cruel conflicted place called America. I am the double-back winding swamp snake who can cure these tortured spirits living here in this hellfire & brimstone place if only they will listen to me tell them the righteous truth. But until then I will come and go as I please as I want to sliding through the night with my mojo bone and juba shaking feather and appear whenever and wherever it suits me in my black hat and black cape sometimes riding a black horse and carrying a black whip that is my tongue that cracks and slips through the language we speak like a black mamba snake I move fast as an out-of-control brushfire strike deadly quick as a drones exploding missile and then Im gone just like that in the blinking flash of an eye.;
A Streetperson crying. It\s alady with a terrible pain. She\s yellingover and over thatNobody\s cares.Nobody Cares.Nobody cares.She\s right I guess.Nobody cares about anything except her,cause she\s got a shopping cart full of garbage.Let the good times roll.And a policeman\s comforting alost little girl. He\s holding heragainst his big blue chestwhile his partner calls headquarters.It\s terrible, but there\s nothingthey can do to help her.It\s like the Cairo Bazaar hereon Telegraph this afternoon. Maybe that\s whythe lady was screaming.She was sad about the kid,David Henderson is saying.We\re sliding between odd-lotsandal vendors, stained-glasswindow-makers, and people who fashionjewelry out of spoons.Maybe so, I say, worried, believing,hurrying in for coffee at the Mediterranean.;
fear is an infection in a refugee campthe Indian poet brings & greetingsfrom her students, at least the onesshe remembers stumbling out the rearof her mind as I remember a fenceI was sure Id never seen fondly weavingdreams in Gods Own Country, a vitalgoodness in that world she believes & inspite of all the hard things I wont botherlisting now, know a campaign aint worthshit unless shit stirs the mobetta, pli mybut what for & for whose sake do I feelonly anger, sweet jolts, disappointmentgone from me and hope ran cold saynothing of art, nothing of the variable logsagain, here: I have this problem with dream;
To make a startout of particularsand make them general, rollingup the sum, by defective means         Wm. Carlos Williams         Paterson: Book 1Feb. 15 \93                        1Los Feliz Blvd Bridge:       The flood water watchers       feel the power of the river       roaring underneath their feet       as the rain pelts the pavement,       swelling the river even further.This bridge went out in the flood of 1936       A tree trunk broadsides       the bridge\s buttresses.       At 30 m.p.h., the whole structure       takes the shock. All of us feel it       in the dark. We laugh nervously,       caught in the headlights       of a video van.Lit by a field producer, the weather man does his midnight stand-up.                         2       To lay this down once and for all.       To lay my burdens down.       To lay my body down.       That\ll be the day.                         3      Climbing up into the San Gabriels      in a caravan of cars behind Jim      and Jack and Dorothy Green and      Tom Janeway and Torii getting antsy,      I want to see the creek. We get there.      Torii crawls out on      a branch above a      waterfall, calling      back at us,      Two rocks!      When we turn around,      we think we see      the chilly waters descending      into Greater Los Angeles.                         4      Catherine Mulholland says      that when she was a girl sometimes      you\d have to row to Van Nuys High School.      Now the school is bordered by deep concrete canals.      There used to be      enough water to      irrigate with      nearly all year-round      around here.      Where did it go?      Literally, where did it go?      Now there\s just the      Technical Advisory Board      of Friends of the Los Angeles River      trying to figure out      how much of it      has been lost.                         5                      Very intense dreams               I must be coming                      down with something.               I hope it\s nothing                      nearly as intense               as my vision of Earth                      as the New Mars               red dust storms rolling                      around a planet               that died a long time ago.                         6      At the overflow ponds      between the river and the      Virginia Country Club      I saw a Great Blue Heron      regurgitate its lunch, a      foot-long carp that was      still struggling for its life,      as he beat it to death against      a rock. His wings raised,      his shoulders hunched,      the Blue wards off a snowy white      American Egret      that\s jabbing its beak      into the back of the Blue\s      trying to get at his food.      The Blue Line train      rumbles by overhead      with its passengers      pointed toward Los Angeles.      No one even looks up from      their newspapers, the      Press-Telegram and the                       Daily Breeze.                         7What is a river       little boys throwing         rocks in             to hear them plop.  Bigger boys on mopeds.      Big boys drinking port winesmash their bottles,   showering the concreted river shoulderwith glittering glass.                  Pelicans dive into a      school of fish just down-             stream from the Anaheim Street Bridge              in Long Beach,the distant Vincent Thomas              barely visible as the rain descends.          It doesn\t pay to be      merely pictorial.Pelicans, you must be                the agents of your        own survival.                         8                        I wish you would                 walk with me here                            more often             red-wing blackbirds      nesting in the cat-tailselectricity humming       in the high-tension lines.                         9      In this terrible dream      my poetry books      were left to moulder      in the Rose Garden      while I did the play-by-play      for my son\s high school football games.      What I objected to was the clich\d rain      beating down on the heartfelt city      like tears. What I objected to      was the 1000\s of storm drains      that carrier our garbage      down the river to the sea.                         10      My sunglasses flipped off my head          and fell into the river with a splash      while the cameras whirred.          What did I learn at the Water & Power meeting?      Don\t be cool.                It\s not Us vs. Them      It\s the wind      as it bends \cross the river.      It\s the cottonwoods      as the garbage that festooned their branches      at the end of the rainy season      disappears beneath their delicately curling      pale-green foliages      by the middle of Spring.                         11                  The man is in the river.                  The woman is the river.                  The man is washing his clothes.                         1215 year-old                Adam Bischoff                              reaches desperately                                               for the out-stretched fireman\s hand                 but the river\s too fast.                                               It rolls himunderneath the Balboa Blvd Bridge.                             He\s alreadyhalf-dead,          his body temperature falling into hypothermia           fighting   to keep himself from falling asleep             as a rope ladder suspended from a          swift water rescue team helicopter                                          bobs just out of reach.          His rescuers                    watch helplessly                               from the banks                        as he disappears          through the weir into                our ancient fear   of drowning.                         13                  I like the way you                  bent over naked, flesh                  caf au lait in the moonlight                  through the bay laurel,                  to take my cock.                         14      Underneath the      Glendale Freeway Bridge      a troll leans out at me,      howling drunkenly      I luuuuuve yoooo!      I blow him a kiss      as I jog by on my first run      home from the Doctor\s      Just wanting to check how      the organism is operating.      I reach into my lungs      for more energy and bend      into the oxbow that starts      at the north end of the      Taylor Yard. The first thing      I ever learned about the river      was that it wanted to wend.                         15      The morning was clear and crisp.      I wore a hand-me-down tweed suit from Mr. Guy.      I walked along the river with the Mayor      and a few city councilmen. It was a pure      photo opportunity. It flutters into my memory      like a snapshot taken by a friend of mine,      Mr. Big Greg Edwards, or Treetop as he used to be      called before he started painting and      signing his works Gregory.                         16THE FOUNDING OF FRIENDS OF THE LOS ANGELES RIVER      Pat Patterson, Roger Wong, and I      meet Fred Fisher      at the old Challenge Dairy on Vignes Street      for early morning      brandies and coffee.      We are on our way      down to the river      for the first time.      We carry heavy duty wire clippers      to cut through the fence beside the      1st Street Bridge courtesy of Gregg Gannon,      then we      climb down the steep,      cement-covered bank      to the river.      We don\t know where we\re going exactly.      We walk upstream      to where the Arroyo Seco      flows into the Los Angeles.      This must have been      one of the most beautiful places      around here, once      a thicket, a confluence,      an Avalon at the meeting      of year-round streams.      Dear quiver at the edge of memory.      Night herons splash.      There are steelhead. We don\t like      to look backwards.      Now there are railroad tracks      on both banks of the river, two freeway      bridgesthe 110, and the 5cross it.      Through a tunnel where somebody is      sleeping on a grey mattress      in a torched VW van,      the Arroyo meekly flows.      Cement will turn back,      into sand some day. Today there\s      thirty guys with jackhammers, leveling      the pavement      ahead of an airport runway paving machine.      It makes an unholy noise,      so we address ourselves to the river.      We ask if we can      speak on its behalf      in the human realm.      We can\t hear the river saying no      so we get to work.      News Item: Devil\s Gate Dam is re-named the      Hahamungna Watershed Park. In Gabrieleno,      Hahamungna means Flowing Waters, Fertile Valley.      Today the Hahamungna flows into the Los      Angeles northwest of downtown. What was the Los Angeles River called      before the arrival of the Christian priests?;
For TThe number of years of your sentence...Your favorite number.Its lucky for me. They have to rule in my favor now.Forget-me-notsYour favorite flowers.Cuz they match my eyes, faded though they are now.You threaded them into every cap, bootie, bag you crocheted.Always, you asked for smokes in exchangeYour neighbors ordered them in the next commissary.Once you asked for a Kit Kat, excited that your daughterwould visit you. They denied her entry, and you returned to the celland flushed down the Kit Kat right away.Afterward, you crocheted a dress for her, sitting upon the lower bunk, not sleeping for a week.Each time we met, youd end with an Im so tired breathYou lost your appeal.What started as an ordinary coldthe prison doc diagnosingon the kite itself that you sent requesting an X-rayturned into cells multiplying like the lace in your hands.At least, I am getting outyou had winkedthe last time we met.;
Born into a family of escapees, orphanedparents mulliganed,fled, deserted to the desert.His first escape, years beforehe left the family for prison,was getting himself adopted.Twenty years later, at the beginningof a twenty-year sentence, includingfour counts of bail jumping,Sister Sylvia told me he would pickme up from school. Instead, the policeshowed, told me if I didnt tell themwhere he was, Id go to jail, too.Five years under my belt, I laugheduntil I cried.Used to imagine meeting him, once-familiar-looking Magwitch,in a cemetery oceans awayperhaps once more, after myselfescaping into good fortune,newly minted gentleman child, richopening the door to a chattycockney stranger, Youre my sonmore to me nor any son.Ive put away money,only for you to spend.Thereafter I only ever have seenhim in newspaper headlines,rap sheets, too afraid to move beyondthe first few sentences   Outlaws Terrorize Tri-State   Spelling Bee Fosters New Attitudes Among Inmates   Officers Comb Metro-Area for Escapees   Escape from confinement   additional 7 yrs   Escapee Returned to Prison After 4 days   Wanted Man Breaks Handcuffs, FleesYet...never escaped the Dirty South.And each time he went insidethen vanished, he stingily stole breath,bits of a beating heartleft little pieces of himself in cells,courthouses and scattered bitsneath the MasonDixonfar from World-Famous Houdini,King of Cuffs was amateur,Zeno proving nomotion is possible, timeis divisible, infinitely.;
I can hear our motherthrough the plywood doorof my brothers roomseparating themfrom the rest of the householdI am carefulto not creak the hingesthat guard their sacred spacehe giggles joviallyand I imagine himwrapped in the samepeach comfortermother sleeps inclapping his handsand clasping his mouthto catch sighs of wonderand awemother retells him storiesof magical kingdomsruled by a Monkey Kingmy brother dreamsof pulling out tufts of his own hairand blowing them into the windtransforming each strand into a minionhell huff ordersthat command his mightand righteousnessand mother will be prouddaddy startles melifts me into the airuntangling my bodyfrom the coldcrevice of the doorframeand secures me with callousedarthritic handsinto his heartmy earstill firmly pressed against my scalpis red and numband achesto reattach to mothers voiceshe hasnt gotten to the partin the storywhere theres room for one moredaddys footstepsbounce me on the round of his bellywhere Ive rubbedand patted in jubileethroughout my childhoodbut tonightthere is no magic hiddenin there for meno conquerable land or faithful servantsto prove my worthonly cabbagesteamed fishriceand chilled beerhis white tee now clings to himin wet patches of grayat the shoulder as hecradles usinto his wornleather La-Z-Boyhis inaudible wordsattempt to instill meaningand resilience in mewhile I try desperately to findthe monkey in his storypast the hardshipand sorrowand despairAnything you want...you have to get itthrough the blood of your own hands.and with thathis story endsmy longinghis wordsblown into the windbeside one anotherin allegiancehis steady breathlulls me to sleepon his chestwrapped in his armswhere its warm;

I soar with the red-tailed hawk.I battle demons, blocking, kicking,And screaming.Sometimes gliding during the day,Looking out of my window theater,A narrow slit at the backOf the cell,3 inches wide and 3 feet long.I cherish the buzzards, turkeys, geese,Deer, wild dogs, coyotes, snakes,And rock doves.I see spiders sparringAt different levels in the windowsill.Sometimes I see my pastIn the window theater.Even after 4 decades in prisonNot one day goes byWithout me hating myselfFor the life I took.Sometimes I sprain my footKicking the wallsIn my dreams.Why was I chosen to killAnd not be killed?I get up from my bunk,Broken with remorse and sorrow,The pain eating at my marrow.I wonder when is enough enough.Here where I must liveEvery momentAnd breathe in every breath.Here in my window theater at nightI dream of ruby-painted toes.Isnt it enough you keep me awayFrom people I could surely help,From clean water, nutritious food?Isnt it enough you keep me awayFrom family and friends so longMost have passed on?You keep me away from a womans breath,Touch, scent, and voice.Isnt it enough you keep me awayFrom resting my headIn her lap to sleep or weep?Whose sins am I prayingFor now after 41 years?I look in my window theaterAnd see no moon tonight.Look at the first pictureOf me incarcerated.Look at me today.You dont see the changes?Close your eyes and youll seeInside change as well.How can a man stay saneAnd not have a woman in his life?It is hell, when you seeA woman and cannot say helloTo her as a man to a woman.Isnt it enough you keepMe away from accomplishingMany of my goals?Isnt it enough you keep me awayFrom flowers and deserts,From parks, valleys, mountains,Rivers, trees, and seas,Mountains and dreamsThat I could seeFrom the barred window theater.Isnt it enough.;
In memory of John Fowlethese leaves are not from in herethey are nothing like the towering pinethat prickles crevices into my sky with itsdecaying and sullen branchesthese leaves are robust & hearty stillsneaking their way onto a stageof concrete like renegadeprima donnas at burlesquethey dance and flickerbare glimpses of saffron & sepiablow kisses from lips a tint of rougei am certainno man can recreatethese leaves must bethe ones you saw each dayas you sat close by paintingthey huddled together didnt theyand danced harmoniouslyas they fanned rainbows into your skyi create a story in my mind of howyou mustve smiled and pressedthose rose-kissed cheeks toward your eyesbut your leaves are changing in hereas all the fallen doi watch as one little ballerina races byunable to keep paceshe collides into a steel wallhalf her body in my companyhalf her body reaching for youher slippers tear in the strugglei whisper to her youre still beautifuland tell her you should goshe twirls her head blushingthen exposes her drying heart toward meshe waits for me to come for hershe waits for usto save each other;
When my brother left, I painted our roomblue to make a more manageable sky. Butthe room couldnt mean anything besidesan offering of endless daylight for the paradeof shadows and the solitude shadows purchaseby virtue of their existence. Besides,I only needed something collapsible, a placefor me to collect some quiet. And my thoughtsbecame clouds, just like in cartoons.Where was I? Yes, the blue became the roomand prepared a silence of its own. For all the trees.I planted them. In pots. And the birds defectingfrom the old sky we left behind were welcomedlike the rest of us. Of course, the original skygrew jealous, wouldnt you? Ultimatums were set,sides chosen  each faction manufactured biggerand bigger speakers. Volume knobs turned to 10.Then, walls of roar. I dont care who won. Really.Im not a good liar. Ive been looking for the perfectmetaphor for sadness. All along. I apologizefor nothing. I sit with my sadness, desperateto relieve its weight. Its not as easy as everyonemakes it seem. I tried to cover my tracks. I onlyencountered a variety of distant stares, all the foga morning could muster, entering with its fleetingcharm. So many rainy windows, and the callsof birds no one ever sees. This is the endeveryone hates: the main character wakes up.Dont worry. This is a poem. But Im not the speaker.The speaker is the speaker. His brother is notmy brother leaving, being called to a different sky,another room, everything turning blue and bedlam behind him.;
Framed in doorwaycrumpled in Buddha shapecomplected of another raceIndeed, you traveled farGift to yourselfat great priceto your MotherCellmate woke     to you ajar     and goneYou pavedhis rough road:     Suspicion     Accusation     Unanswerable     QuestionBut you hung six feetfrom sleeping menSeems indecent:     could not get     away to get     awayBury Christmas     with dope-line     choke-line Bury     Christmas for the boys     next door Bury Christmas     You Old Boy and bury it     once more;
We met at Burger King...            so I thought I could have us my wayIf I had known you were gonna drive through more than once,I wouldve made the first round a Happy Meal so that webroke each others lust and fell in trustrather than the other way around   Dessert                   should never come firstbecause see,    we missed some things,   or never let them outLike how I never told you Ive always hated needlesSo much so,that at the age of 26,every time a doctor is about to stick me with one,I still look awayNot so much out of fear as it is a disdain of being prodded by something sharper than a parents reproachful wit        And every single time they pull the needle,   for some strange reason I return my glance to find myself slightly bruisedWhich confounds me...Because its not so hard to find these veins which puff like speed bumps at the slightest bit of pressure appliedNot so hard as the pressure applied by you every time you were convinced I lied by the accusations of anotherYet you failed still to see the coagulation of sentiments rise above the senses and form emotional reminisces of the times you leftOr are they the times I left? Because...Moving at indiscriminately criminal pacesseeking financial safety that skipsthe proverbial GO without collecting two billfoldstwice,no wait...three times in a row is ultimately a fault of my own,is it not?For that I was gifted a measure of your indifference inside a box you cant take out    As I sat...an envelope would fall through a flapwith your name written on the back...Written whispers hinting at visits,                    more missives,                        and the chances of you taking me back                                   every time I make it back and...Those few times you appeared on the other side of the glass                                and left handprints behind,you kept melting my common sense and injecting me with hope...   Hope...                        is the lazy mans drug...        and the guilty mans religion...                  I should have ODd on the church stepsWith every dose the little traces of you were often caustic,passing through the vital moments causing emotional cotton fever,LikethemotherwholeftforfiveyearsanddisappearedLiketheotherexeswho vacillateinandoutoffearofholdingontoadeadmanLikethehomeboyswhoforgetaboutmeuntilsomeoneaskshowIamLiketheprayed-toGodwhosepromiseswerentkept    Until it all flowed out in a crimson rage                             through a broken hopes sharp scope               and left spots on my soul, obsidian-tinted violet-blues                                                     Im through...                            Of turning into liquid in your eyes                  and falling from the dark cloud in the skies above you,I stopped waiting for your letters, too                            Instead...I call every denial from the court a love letterand I know youd ask, Why?Id just say because Lady Justice never wants to let you go,shed rather hold on to you until you grow oldTill death do us part, as if that day in court,marriage was pronounced...Shes one youd plead and beg to pay alimony to,to take all you have,if only you could just leave and be free,but shell keep you in a recycling miserydespite the infidelity she has with two million other justified suckersMarriage...is an institution after all.And leaves you with as much ambition as dog without a tail in a circular roomAnd so still I sit...With a sentence longer than the sun is projected to exist,so long ago on shooting starsI ceased making a wish Im struggling to find a space between pure existence                                         and cold hard dyingFor lack of a better phrase, we left eachother back there, in thatphase of youthwhere impulses rang truth more resonant and deafeningthan the thoughts banging against the silence in these cells presently doAnd in the same way I havent here,                         nor do I feel weve escaped our love...But Im tired of teetering on the seesaw between reminiscing               and realityIve spent so much time trying to grow through this bid,but a tree planted indoorswill eventually hit a ceiling,I realized itwhen someone once asked me what God wasand I said I wasnt dense enough to claim to knowbut if one exists and created me,then theres got to be some essence of it within myself, and I need to searchthere for it...before I look anywhere elseAnd I need to tap that power to extricate my soul from this derisive spell, but I dont want hopes helpBecause hope has become a needle...and Im tired of its bruise;
On a cool morning of false rain,cruel and complicitwhen the low and shameless gray skyrefuses to shed tears,our rusting spades bite chunks from the hard red clay.We make slow but steady progress,as if the iron earth will refuse him too.Bout halfway down to the Promised Land,having buried our lifeless criticisms of incarceration,the four of usve said nothing,beyond weary sighs and shifty eyesat the shoddy fit of the box of yellow pinefeaturing only an ancient prisoner ID# in flat-black paint.Of a sudden, clouds rend for a paternal sun,peering down to impart a gentle wisdom:at the four corners where meetIgnorance and Knowledge, Brutality and Culture,we will find the merciful dignitywith which to treat our honored dead.Noses rebelling against musts of labor and mortalityupon lowering him into the cold ground,our spades direct an onomatopoeia of dirt pattering onto the box,lending this prisoner, this man his final voiceha-rumpf...ha-rumpf...ha-rumpfto continue in death the path he chose in life he who would refuse all who would refuse him.;

A hanging in Northport, Alabama, 1897Welcome to this joyful event.Boot heels stompto the pulled stringsof the fiddle.Spilt ale bridges the gapsbetween pale fingersas upturned jugspass in celebration.The scent of wet leavesand raucous laughterfill my head.Am I alone?Or does the cold wet groundonly reserve these soundsfor those who are one breathfrom its embrace?My chaffed wrists are slit,filling fast with rope fibersand warm blood.My throat burnsin anticipationof the ropes turnto place its fingersaround my neck.The slightest movementflakes the dried semenof my four rapists.Look as they kickto the boot heels rhythm.I wish that was all they took.Flakes fall as the nooses knotbrings my ear to a searing hot,I am forced to standupon unstable legs.Replaying the look on my sons faceas they did the same.Hes eight, how can he feelshame?His non-cryas the knot slidesand he begins to diegives me the strengthnot to beg.A nigger hangingsuch a joyful event,so I smile.;


His letter said, Get there early.The line is long. Wait.Stop to watch the steam rise from the metal teethof the razor wire on the fence, like breath.Wives check their makeupas they pace. Fathers in dirty jeanssmoke cigarettes to bare knuckles.A mother in a headscarf holds a childwhose face you cant see. She sees youwatching and says, She buries herselflike the dead.His letter said, Only bring what you need.Place your clear plastic bag on the table.Identify the contents one item at a time:State of Florida drivers license,two twenty-dollar bills.Maam, do you have a firearm,drugs or drug-related paraphernalia,anything that could be used as a weaponby an inmate at any time?You have the memoryof your older brothers nineteen-year-old face,the lit match of your collective anger,your shared fathers close-set eyes and easy smile,a twenty-five-year-old bruisein your hand from the last timeyou touched him.When instructed, followthe C.O. into a sterile room. Raise your handsto allow her gloved hand under the foldsof your sagging breasts.While you wait, close your eyes:inside you is a prison full of brothers, waitingto touch your face, to tell you in person,It wasnt our fault.;
This walk is a danceIt saysWe made it, kidFreePolitical refugeesLet me show youWhere you come fromA scar on my bellyJagged lines on my breastYou almost killed me, you know?I wouldve given anythingFor you to be everythingI never get to beI gave you my heartBlood-red inkEngraved on my chestCrossed myselfMade a pact with GodTo give my last breathI covered your eyesTo blind youFrom pretendCardboardCutoutsPosing as mothersBurned baby dollsGave you birth controlBecause my daughterIs more than a single motherIn a world with no menMore than a welfare checkI told you the truthAbout the boys locker roomTheyll all run from you nowOr run to you afraidThats powerfulWe are not average womenYour memoriesWill be different from mineOpen my closetTake a look for yourselfThe skeleton with the weltsAnd bloody legsIve held onto it for yearsMy mother gave it to meThis one is from your fatherIt was all that he leftMy father gave me one, tooI got rid of it thoughOnce I realizedThey were both the sameThose things are years awayTheyve gone before usLost photo albumsHeart-shaped lockboxesWere something newUnlocked silent lipsTearless eyes and unscarred skinYou can dream nowIll watch over youWhile you sleep;
I used to live in a single-wide, tilted on blocksin a dusty trailer park,or as the sign saidto trucks that rumbled by,a much more respectableMobile Home Court.Thin pressboard panelshid a million roachy lives:turning on the lightssent them fleeing, backinto the walls  tinyfeet pattered like rainshowers in retreatfrom the sun.I used to dreamof a terrible stormone to reach downwith a dark, twisted armand pick up those trailers,those non-mobile un-homes,crush them in a cloudy fistand scatter them like seedsacross a plowed and fertile land.;
Here is how often you see donuts in kid-jail: never. Zerotimes. Like seeing a cat or a dog, a cell phone. A whitekid, a comfy chair. Just me and this one kid, same kidwho wrote Monkey Rescue first time we worked together.He saved Junior from a fire, then they got high by the pool.I drew hearts and stars in the margins, helped spell monkey,wrote great job! They gave this kid two donuts, a smallcarton of milk, and we wrote imitations of One Art, mewith no breakfast yet. My stomach growled. The kidlooked up, both of us remembering I have a body. Thateverybody gets hungry, whether or not they are free.This cracked us up, and he offered me a donut. So I saidYou are a sweetheart and I am never going to eat your donut.Which made no sense to him. Dude, I have a car and moneyI can walk out of here and buy a dozen as soon as you finishthis poem. So he kept working. An empty classroom, One Art,sharp pencil, still room. What are some things you have lost?Mother, Father, Sister. Grandmother, school, ring. Country.Bracelet. My stomach kept growling, we kept laughing, hekept offering me a donut. Donut as distraction. Donut:a gift. Finally he said Look, Im going to go pee. Then youcan eat the donut with no one watching. Donut as test!He left, and I said to the guard, Hey Im going to eatthat kids donuts real quick-like while hes gone. And the guardwas horrified, said hed give me five bucks to not touchthe kids donuts, explained donuts are hard to come byin juvie, blah blah blah blah donuts. While Im likei was justkidding! i would never mess with the preciousdonuts! Kid came back, and we finished his draft, whichhe asked me to keep till next time. And I drove away, pastForest Hills and new condo construction, Blissful Monkeyyoga studio, Whole Foods. Parked my car and walked into myhouse, where no one hurts me, where I eat whatever I want.;

 That which has becomethat which is still becoming and that which is owed.;

I see you peeking timidlyfrom between the skeletal barsof your bleached, bony fortress,vibrant colors a sign of defiancein this scorched grayscape.I hear your silent exclamationof resurgence and rebirth.Your seed burrowed deepas the buck sheltered youfrom the raging furnace above.He must have been fearless,offering himself as sanctuaryto your unborn, fragile beautyin the face of natures fury.He nourishes you still, I think.His essence feeds your tiny rootsas his spirit rises in your petalsand radiates from your golden eye.His iron will lives within you,reflected in your bright bloomreaching up toward the sun.I wonder what you seefrom your apocalyptic high ground,up among the blackened stumps,baked cinders, and ash.The charred hillside gives nothingbut perhaps you look towardwhat will follow as you grow.This barren charnel floorwill be healed someday.The Mother will make it so.She bestows her healing powersas part of a grand designthat always lives on.You are the hope she sends.;
Fog against the prison fence.    Crows eating crumbs      from the generous.The yards secure      with extra guards.Birdsongs interlace       their scraggly gaits.;
Like cream skimmed offthe topfoamrunningdown the sides and Iam left,rich residuewastedat the bottomjust to bewiped up laterand suddenlynobodyknowswhereIam.;
Suddenly nobody knows where you are.Youre just a memory,an echo,an idea thin as smoke.Your last text, call, letter, Facebook postonly footprints in the surf.Your edges blur and you becomea friends story,a lovers history.Initially, you beat against the panes in set-aside framesbegging to be taken outand rolled into motion once more.But after a second winter,then a third, and fourth,there comes something serene and warmbehind the haze that smokes the broken hourglass.Something newand just for you.This world belongs to you and yoursand when you glance back and recall your lifes movementwith a sigh of days gone by,you are irrevocably comfortedhaving become that final exhalethat hangs in the air after the passing.You poseand hold it.We are all the dead.I am not apart from you for long,except for breath,except for everything.;
A prison passageFour layers of cement boxes,Stacked by the waters of a creek Each one filled with music.A stranger sits on my bunk,Eating a box of tiny animals.It is his room too.Green beans and meatballs,In steel boxes in hot water.A pool of brown gravy!I accept the filled plastic,Slouching along the steel rails,Collecting myself from the assortment.I find myself in the Rec.,Once again a disaster.A cacophony of sounds.The large orange ball,Like a hurling meteor,Gravity descending.The plastic ball bounces,Between wooden hands on the green table.Someone is knocking!A sharp diamond of lightIn the middle of the dark glass.Then, The Cosby Show!Theo, are you crying?There in the dark room in the box?Theo, are we brothers?;
I talk to the students in jail about freedom, how in Americawe obsess over it, write it over flags on T-shirts, spreadit around under eagles. It has something to do with gunsand fireworks, Harley-Davidsons, New Hampshire, living freeuntil youre dead. I tell the students I think the peoplefetishizing freedom dont mean it. That they really meanlook over here, away from all the slaverywe did, away from all the jail! I tell them theyare the experts, ask them to write what freedom means:privacy is freedom and if you feel held back, afraidto do something, youre not completely free. No fearof loss. No fear of hunger, no fear of pain. A bodyto call my own, a voice driven by my own mind.The security of a dry, warm place to sleep. To ownmy own time left here. Being able to hold my sonat night. Showering in private. Freedom to meis having the choice to walk away from a fight. Freedoma work in progress. Everyday freedom, the real work for us all.;
The world is the world.Srikanth ReddyDay forms night over again in fine glass sheets of blue.The unit is.See my body, a shifting silver ministry.Hell kicked over two days ago  ground officers shaped time into this shape.Our countrys a scene in a movie.A banger, a masterlock, an extension cord, respectively.Sit inside your anything beautiful, your anything song.Its not so bad.___Natural life swings wide, turns physical.Like a good family, we fetch water, mind honor, write letters.Dream the loose blue tank top, the ceaseless white.The mirror rejects your reflection, citing inappropriate content.Dayroom immigrants melt into threads of crucial affiliations.My fathers contaminating line shares a bottle with me.A grin strains, readjusts, speaks an earthy state.Cleaned up, you can culture a facility refund.___The US approached with coffee and a bed.Tired, I read, ate.Tomorrow the cages will wait for their respective dogs.A hot bus glows with peppers, tomatoes, carrotsa premeditated drive-through art.The origami engineering is a dream.Hanging from stardust, the installed concertina almost winking.My window opens to a very small wire.Beyond the glowing retrospect, a region shines.___As a boy, I could hop a chain-link fence.I breathed snow.I convinced the kids from school the sky was my mother.Here, men play heroes to crickets in the yard.I used to run mountains, but Ive never been on a train.Ive gotten used to the warehouse.The world waterfalls to a future beyond this grass and dirt.Ive learned a person can still grow in a pool of gray.___Possible futures pour like loud blues from too-small headphones.I know mine is not murdered.Let me say it again: I know my future is not murdered.A wrench heavies through, tumors hours into years.Divorced from peers, entire legs become teeth, then clamshells, then solid crystal.I see people freeze, then melt, then freeze.I would like to ask for homes number, take her to dinner sometime.Sixty each pull-ups, chin-ups, and push-ups premeditate a glistening out there.___Not even Eliot or Pound approach the melancholy weapon of the punitive farm.In profile, I separate from this justice.Tattoo economy pens my skin into a letter.Dear anyone.Distorted paintings brush against the sentence.Any box will logic a soul into a numbered life.I dont know what I look like.I picture my sister running and playing games when my mind is being searched.___Even inside this U-shaped slab, I dont worry about my safety.I lock my life to a flower pressed between books.My mom and dad and brother and sister and grandparents and friends all have names.Bodies and names as infinite as fields of corn.So do I.I tell them to sit in the grass and look up at storms and melting lights.Look and look because they can.I know one day I will be held again.___Some days I walk and talk with other men.Some days we sprint and lift ourselves until we flower into muscle.We package our adult selves into small metal walls.We dont say we feel like paper in a fountain.Instead, Dear fish, we write.Dear kids and bare skin and crickets outside the fence.Dear Cheerios, dear cherries, and pretzels, and chocolate chips, and chocolate bars with orange in them. Dear iced teaand making out. Dear school. Dear New Hampshire and California and New Yorkand Detroit. Dear barbershops and the shape of clothes not blue:     I remember you.;
Coloring Book 13, 2018. Screen printing ink, oil pastel, and oil stick on paper. 60.25  56 inches. All photos by Charles Benton. All images courtesy of the artist, JTT, New York, and Carlos/Ishikawa, London  Coloring Book 16, 2018. Screen printing ink, graphite, and oil stick on paper. 60.25  56 inches  Coloring Book 17, 2018. Screen printing ink and oil stick on paper. 60.25  56 inches  Coloring Book 18, 2018. Screen printing ink, oil pastel, and oil stick on paper. 60  50 inches  Coloring Book 21, 2018. Screen printing ink, graphite, white out, and oil stick on paper. 60  50 inches;

America, God bless you if its good to youAmerica, please take my handcan you help me understKendrick Lamar, XXXIf Im transformed by language, I am oftencrouched in footnote or blazing in title.Where in the body do I beginLayli Long Soldierexhibit a)frantz fanon: The first thing which the native learns is to stay in             his place, and not go beyond certain limits.lolo:        You have to get an education, because theres really no other             way to make money.tony montana: In this country, you gotta make the money first. Then             when you get the money, you get the power.frantz fanon: This is why the dreams of the native are always of               muscular prowess              his dreams are of action and of aggression. I dream I am               jumping, swimming,             running, climbing: I dream that I burst out laughing,               that I span a river in one             stride  or that I am followed by a flood of motor cars               which never catch up with me.exhibit b)you asked me how it felt, the coldsteel cradled in my young hands.   nothing.it felt like nothing. just space in a cradleof air & winter dust at that point I was purespine & bass. I thought I was everythingas the snow fell around our streets in furies.           years flew over me & I began the trebles           of scarring my body with the people I love.               simultaneously, I threaded my crimes through my skin.exhibit c)(there was no middle class in the Philippines back then. you were poor or you were rich.)(...)(yeah, Id say so, Id say we were rich.)facts:I came from a legacy of village traders.the Japanese operated out of the family compound during the occupation.my Lolo was the youngest & scrappiest of four brothers.his father bankrolled the school in their village.all of his brothers became doctors & lawyers  he became a mechanical engineer.I only remember his hands covered in grease & grime  his gold rings flaked in oil.hearsay:I believed my bloodline to be steeped in peasantry.turns out my veins are swollen with the blood of provincial aristocrats.to fight both battles is to exhaust all remedies.              [did you sell drugs?]my Lolo brought his new family to the West to give our blood an American education.he could no longer stand to be the fourth prince & wanted more than fields for the heirs of his body.              [but did you sell drugs?]one could say you recognized my inheritance, chromosomes waiting to ignite your suburbs.I have always been brilliant at bending the rules  all matter has the historic ability to flex long before a breaking point.              [but did you sell drugs?]yes. I sold drugs.[are you sorry?]I am still apologizing in many ways.exhibit d)a friend who is a Trump supporter asks: well, what about all the people inChicago who are killing their own kind? why isnt that being focused on?I draw up a field & introduce him to creation, how each buried statue has found evidence that the body is flexible enough to kneel & rigid enough to become a weapon, the line too often blurred with bleached palms  the mind simply tracks & catalogs.I direct him to the tautology of partisan politics & we lift steel to reclaim the spaces we inhabit.exhibit e)I am told by an officer that I dont look like I belong in prison, even with all the tattoos.I look like I hailfrom a nice, respectful family.later, I read about Evangelista Torricelli, who reasoned that we live at the bottom of an ocean of air.;
We are taught notto gamble.Perhaps it is thought we have lostenough alreadylegs, vision, speech,the typical useof our bodies.Others\ fears would teach usto cringe at any thoughtof any risk.Disability and riskdon\t mix.Risk is somethingwe are supposed to be protected fromby agencies, by professionalsby parents, by doctorsby invisibility,by shameby confinement if necessary.We must be kept safe: This is one of the lieswhich fills the bedsof the so-called homes.So we embrace the risksto fight the lies.This is our gamble:Minute by minute, city after cityfrom the tense beginning to the jubilant orscattered endof every protestwith every rhythmic word of every chantat each blocked entrance, each barricadewith every defiant inch forwardevery move towardfreedom for our peopleany time we raise a fistor a songto meanWe\re never going awayin every confrontation, up and down the lengthof the stand-offeach and every time, we aretesting the humanityof people who wear a badge,carry a gunand fear our incomprehensible strength.We know this isa dangerous testfor some fail as extraordinarilyas others pass.It is a gamble, risky and promising.It may pay offin unmet eyes or a curious stare,surly dismissals or a question,dialogueor bruises.;
Whisper me a secret lyricgrind the melody with my boneslet the wind from the trumpetscatter the ash for mileswinners prize in losers gripempty me with tease o sleazebankrupt emotions in debttheres no play leftI dropped a tear in the coin slotgambled it away on gamesdid you make then break the rulewe both played but you cashed out;
Within the bony armorof this disordered mindticks a callous timepiece a ruthless agent of judgmentthere to punish, to remind.Like slowly dripping water,its monotony is unrelenting,straining the thin threadssuspending my desperation.Its claw-like hands reach out,slashing honed razors,each tick slicing deeplyinto my tenuous sanity.Teetering over the edge,I topple into affectless isolationand the refuge of memory.I try but cant rememberthat one last momentof contented silence,that perfect frame ofsimple, sweet stillness.And I cant always discernrealities from fantasies,or truths from imaginings,inside my mental carnival.Confused and perplexed,I ask the questions aloudbut the ghosts only laugh.They already know the thingsI have yet to learnin the hardest of ways.Inevitably I will learnI am learningthat being alone,being lonely always,being nothing forevermoreis a burden far greaterthan I have ever knownand I cannot bear it.So, like the ghosts before me,I will dream of the Boatmanand passage into the voidto surrender myselfunto the Timekeeperand beg him to stop the clock.;
A hall flunky informedThe cubical operatorOf a man hanging in his cell.I lifted my head,As I was one at the time.Eventually, a guard walkedTo that part of the Row.Preachers death was like the others,Nope, wasnt the first time:It started with a complaint,The fixable kind.The guard manages every step.He takes out his key,Opens the outer door,Walks to the cell door.He sees Preacher banging,Walks to the cubicle,Calls the operator and mumbles something,Lights a cigarette, then leaves.Eventually,A fat nurse climbs the stairs.Another guard passes her,I continue to mop.Eventually, they come out with PreacherOn a stretcher with a sheet.I know he is dead.It is on his face.Like ghosts they walk.The guard and nurse,They were talking about buying a truck.Didnt hear what kind.Well, I told a few guys.They said:He was a strange old fellow,Tried to change cells.One not over the boiler.He said he couldnt take the heat.I said,Yeah,Those other guys are fed up too.It was bound to happen again,But what can you doWhen youre a ghost over the boiler?;
I would never have believedthat Id awake one dayin a lonely cell, having strippedmyself of everything preciousthat Id always taken for grantedby shaking a fist at my creatorfor ending the suffering of my belovedin a way other than Id imagined whileon my knees awaiting transportto a place no one belongs, exceptto the state, whosemain concern is the bottom line  bodiesfor which they receive top dollar,but never humans, neversouls, never mothers whose lives have been nothingmore than a series of tragic events,and are now doomed towalk this journeythrough the wilderness withno prophet to lead, nocloud by day orfire by night to preventthe aimless wanderof the hopelessly exhausted, desperateto be anywhere but here or destinedand placed, preciselyon this map,at this pointa testamentthat it doesnt have to endhere, that lifes treasurechest of grace, hope,and redemptioncan be uncovered if wedontstopdigging.;

They handcuff me even though they already cut off my hands.They throw me off a bridge. The bridge is not at fault.They feed me sand. Now I know the meaning of thirst.They want to find a weapon, a new weapon, to kill me and they want me alive so they can cuff me.They want to kill me and they want me alive so they can throw a bridge on me.I am not unique. They are not special.I saw the police arrest a boy for riding his bike on a sidewalk.I saw the mayor at the parade. Its not important that the mayor was dancing with MC Hammer.I saw the mayor at Greek Fest is irrelevant.I saw the police arrest a boy for a guitar case.I asked for a job. They gave me a library card.I asked for my mom. They gave me a coupon for a public defender.I asked for home. They handed me a BART ticket.I asked for a teacher. They cut off my hands.Im so tired this is only the beginning.;
Dont be brilliant.Dont use words for their own sake, or to showhow clever you are,how thoroughly you have subjugated themto your will, the words.Dont try to write a poemas good as your favorite poet.Dont even try to writea good poem.Just peel back the folds over your heartand shine into itthe strongest light that streamsfrom your eyes, or somewhere else.Whatever begins bubbling forth from there,whatever sound or smell or colorswells up, makes your throatfill with unsaid tears,whatever threatens to ignite your hair, your eyelashes,if you get too closewrite that.Suck it in and quicklyshape it with your tonguebefore you grow too afraid of itand it gets away.Dont think aboutwriting a good poem, or a great poem,or the poem to end all poems.Write the poem,you need to hear write the poem you need.;
For TiwiWere driving along looking for an all-night barand I remember no one else but him, and how we laughed,how he stuck his head out the windowand howled. And in the dream neither one of ustalked about our love/hate relationship with tequilaor how we both had a tendency to sprout fangsat a single mirada. Didnt matter if the eyes werefans or jealous. When we found the barwe walked inside and I said, Wait,I have people I want you to meet! I saidThey gotta see you now, like this. And my To said hejust wanted it to be him and I for a while, like this,where I could see his face only lit by neon,where his eyes werent crazed, werent blockedby metal bars or a glass wall, where his voicewasnt crackled by static and a phone line, but smoothmarbles with mountains and forests inside, and allthat damn glimmering brown. So we smoked some motaand chilled. We talked shit about the DJ and said,This musics too mellow.Neither one of us wanted to make any requests or rippleany change. But after some timethe red warm of the room was making me thinkabout things like love and holding hands and I told my ToI had a man he needed to meet. But all he said was Mija, you go.I gotta stay here a while longer. But te amo, he said as I left,leaving him behind on a red velvet couch, chillin with a joint,and clouds pillowing his head.;
Forty books, mostly poetry,religion, or politics. Four timesthe number Im allowed.A Smith Corona Wordsmith 250that will sometimes, while printing,go inexplicably berserk.Appellate briefs, legal workfrom my own little war of attrition:The State vs. Michael Owens.Old letters from loved ones,some who left to join the ancestors,some who just left.And of course, my guilt,always in the periphery of my vision,weighing down the air.;
The standoff with policelulls like an intermissiontension plateausour chanting dimshot concrete ground is claimed  or boundariedwheelchair tire against bootmuscles against brakethey keep us waitingrented buses with lifts    and drivers on overtimeon their wayto take away those who will stillnot moveNervous young copswatch us closelywordlesslywonder what theyre supposed to do with uslisten anxiously for a radioed wordwhen will the buses arriveMeanwhile     sometimeswhile we waitwe talkto each otherEric is carefulkeeping his cigarette away from my oxygen tankhis keen eyes follow my lips motionsmy words shapeswith no movement to my handsI cant speak his languagebut he speaks mineremembering what sound sounds likeSmilinghe talks of what hes losthearing        strength in his legs  most of his   staminaa career in medicineSmilingsquinting against the sunhe talks of what hes gainedthis battle     these friendshow hes grownfrom a doctors arrogance          to the vulnerability   of a patienta better persona gentle fighterHe concludesno shred of ironycalling his   disabilitythe best thing that ever happenedto himIn fact not until later would any      ironyoccur to menot until the week was overthe demonstrations donethe protestors disbursedFor now I was still accustomedto the rhythm of chantingand the knack for observing our historieswithout shameI had grown usedto casual exchanges of prideunder the wary stares of police;
firstEverlasting City of the Myriad of Pillarssends out caravans through timeto trade with itselftrinkets by trinkets by trinketschange handswearing awayinto sand.His Royal Grace, Prince Haruspex Al Fard At Tairordained in the Secrets of Life and Death,is bored in the sun parlorwhere merchantsshow wondersfrom faraway times.He gets up,softly applaudsto a mechanical nightingale,bows in a refined mannerto a mechanical woman,stops for a momentto stare at the collection of alien godsin big green bottles,nods in approval to jugglers,walks away.secondHis lab is cold and half-lit.A dissected frogis fixed on the specimen stage,dead forHis Grace counts the daysyes, for a week and a half.Not rotten, stillnothing rots in Iram,though all formsof corruption and putrescenceare customary herebut dead for sure.The Prince cautiously disengages the clasps,releasing the frog,carefully putsthe dissected amphibianon the palm of his hand.Looks at it indifferently.Pulls himself together.Looks at it with love,slight sorrow,and a touch of passion.His lips, red as an open wound,glow eerilyas he kissesthe butchered critters mouth.The dead frog answersthe Princes electrifying kisswith a twitch of his left hind leg.His Grace contentedly smiles:matters of life and deathare still in check.thirdHave you not considered how your Lord dealt with Aad, Iramwho had lofty pillars?Quran, 89The Everlasting Cityfalls once more,turns into sand,into fine dustand further oninto atoms,into a primordialmedleyof quarks,into shamelessly nakedsingularity,something that shouldnt beand generally failsto exist for a moment.Indeed, your Lord is in observation.For a moment, His Royal Gracecloses his stung eyes,and in a momentary glint of sleepPrince Haruspex is dragged throughFiery Hell thenFrozen Hell, andback into the Mundane Hellof everyday routineknown to each person incoronate.Iram indeed is gone with all its Roses.Into the pits of Gehenna.Pardon me, Your Grace?Oh? Its nothing. Just...Sand...What was that you were just saying?His Royal Grace holds court,bestows a blessing on his subjects,has his picture takenfor the front page of The Iram Chronicle,kisses a childa stillborn oneand the child bursts into tears.forth [sic]And thus it ends.The everlasting city of Iramdecays into sand,where it belongs.The side street of Sighs,devoid of people usually,gets a dozen or soby-passers.Caravanscarrying nothing butsanddepartone last time.The Herald of Fatea half-meter-tall lizardwith an hourglass and an oil lanternin a worn-out robedeclares the end.Cursed be eower water,and eower chimney,and eower very salt.Some truths art to stay untold,Doors to stay unopened,Seals to be left sealed,And unsettling placesNever to be settled.Thats where I come in.Grim reaper,a gaping hole in the very fabricof being, a void.With grinning teeth,as alwaysI take pridein something I cant undo.I unsheathe my swordits edge is sharpened into nothingnessI unsheathe it andbow before the royaltywhom Id wish to sparewere it not so severe.Wait a bit, says His Royal Grace,Im not quite ready.I slowly nod and waitan aeon or so,till Prince Haruspex, eyes wide open,walks toward me,meets the point of my swordwith agonizing gasp,keeps walking,catches my head in his ermine palms,finds my mouth,gives me a kiss,whispers:At the leastI gave it a shot.Smiles.Dies.What happens then,I remember well.Clasp of my palm on the gripof my sword, unclenched.Knees bent.Bumpedagainst the blood-soaked sand.Myself curled upwith blood-soaked mouth,making barking sounds.Sand, wet from my eyeballs,soaked.Grief, grieved.Sorrow, sorrowed.Things to be done, done.Things to be silenced, silenced.Things to be mourned, mourned.Things to be sand,sand.;

ilet da diecast and lay   its all bena gamble      i bet half my scrambledays tween earnin keep and lonelynights      my last mightgon strum dis here riggidy guitar      gots no home gots no starup dere in dat black canopynope      i laffs jokesbe good fo ones widda funnybone      saw george prices woman  onecome ovuh from missippi  shesay      leroy playme a song  dis ol man wits be quicklike a match strike  an ifgeorge gon be unda henry worktruck      imma tuckher in widda tune that make old loverswonna see if coversstill get warm afta all dat timestrange      i had rangedis episode take proly 34hours drank lil nap ya knowaint ben in no bed so roomymaw      on my pawalways say outta dey 13 kids      i da chile who cheese slidof da cracka  i makes hermoan      george come home dat white woman scream  get dis niggaoff me!  his hands wennawrenchin  now im in chicago;
For KAt the tiniest scratch in my throat,Ma boiled basil leaves in water,added shredded ginger bits, crushed peppercorns,and honey, made me drinkthis mix first thing in the morning.    Here, the morning starts with the wake-up call,    The walkway is open for 10 minutes, Ladies.    We line up in the hall to get the traysI drink the milk, eat the toast,    and give the rest away. No one has the time to prepare    anything else for a vegetariansometimes, I get peanut butter     in a cup. I dont gag at the eggs-sausage-burger smell anymore.The blue shirt tucked into pants piped with red on the sidesenshrouds me as I cut soaps and fix heels in the factory.The pay is the highest, so I ignoremy watering-through-fumes eyesthat make the soap bars blur like large snowflakes.    The day I landed in America, the town was in the news for    Worst snow of the season. I could understand the words    if spoken loudly and many times,    but my voice remained suspended    like the veil around my face.They said, Whatever you say can and will be used against you,when they saw the ropes and the knife and the blood.They asked, what happened? speak up.How could I? I had been taught my whole lifeto be quiet and obeyfirst my parents, then mybrother, then my husband and in-laws.    At first, I used to dream I was in a movie,    and the hero would trot into the hall on a white horse,    whose hooves would mark the floor that I buffed    for three hours every day for a month, and take me away,    and I would once again dance to the dhak-dhak    of the dhols during festivals and win the Best Dancer trophy.The rare visits I get are Bend forwardtill I can see your coochee and cough bordereddays that make me shrivel like the tortoise back home.I have stopped dreaming and know now                         that no one will come to save me.;
Like airwe float kite wordsfragile signalsand hearts flappurple wingsLike airmy struggling lungsseize yougasp reliefrelease long-held breathsdesireexpandingcapacity unknownwelcoming gulpsof futureLike airI need clarityshot through with sunlightinvisibly to buoy metowards an idea calledusMy dreamsare mostly silentDoes somethingbesides distanceobscure us?Like airintimacy should be a rightfor nowit is only a promiseLike airyou travel my bloods hungry streamto every limbthis is howfor nowwe touch;
Dedicated to my cellmate in the prison mental hospital, Dmitry Vatulin, thanks to whom I managed to keep my sanity during my first days there. Dmitry was sentenced to ten years of strict regime for drug trafficking, despite the lack of any proper evidence.Sections I, IV, VI, and VII translated from the Russian by Tatiana Retivov, remaining sections written by Andrey Egorov in EnglishiThe impudent clang of lockslops off blessed sleep at midway.Angels convulsively putter aboutsleeps stump and then perish.Foxes hide briskly in their foxholeslooking out from under their lidsin red alarminto the outer darkthere where one of our own,mind you not the worst,is given 5 minutes to pack,not enough for even his bundleswhich only need to be tied.iiIts the end of May, four-twenty in the morn.With jest and joke our fellowdeftly packs the would-be necessitiesinto a dozen makeshift sacksI admit, his smile looks convincingas they take him away,his smile, devoid of cheer, and then, of face,still stays on, etched in stale air, and looks convincing.iiiAngels of our golden dreamscut in halves with the heavy serrated now,devoid of whats left of the moist matter of sleepfreeze, dead, in crescent-like posesand thus,the 4:20 in the morningis the time of the crescents:the first one, intervened in our sleep,the serrated clang of the lock the second one, the Cheshire crescentof our good fellows parting smile.Id lie if I said he never looked lowbut neer too much, most certainly, not now the third oneevery dying bodyof the life flock of our dream angelscut in half, dried down lifeless not to mention the crescent of the moonthat could or could notbut most certainly had toshine through the barswitnessing the ongoing abomination.ivBut even if it did, the moonlight reached usthrough the bars of Butyrka,through the cold glow of a wardens projectorand the residue of sleep in our eyesthen whatever left of it, died in towering cloud,that devoured us as we envisionedten yearsthe term that our inmate was to serve.vTen yearsten and a half: put a year for each evidence,then add another eight, for the lack of proper evidencemakes room for the excessive amounts of justicethere, do you hear it? Tshuhs-tee-sss!Behold! Lady Justice at its worst: blindfold, blunt sword,coiled body, length after length,slithering into a court roomAll rise, the court isss in sssesssioncold, serpentine, scaleless.viSsscales!there, cheap electronic scales,a circumstantial evidence, becomes an alchemy toolto transfigure old junkie into drug lord,to deliver judgment beyond measure and scaleto deliver a junkie from any temptationinto Hell, a gaping tomb, long past overcrowded.Wrong place for such a lively old man, or whoever else.Whod come and bargain for another junkies soul?Not by thy merit thou art dignified,scrawny Cerberus would have snarled,wondering how scarce became guilt these days,though justice is so abundant and vastly delivered.But Cerberus has mouths to feed.And it says nothing.It turns away.It grins.It grins.viiCome morning we cast lotsfor the belongings of the departed:a pullover, a shirt, and baseball capfit me just fine,like they were to me tailored:the departed was a tall old man,lean and sturdy.viiiI turn my new baseball capbackwards, kid-style,and quit thinking of Dmitry Yurievich     as the deceased     as an old man     as bone marrownow fought over bythe maws of Cerberus.Yurievich, I wish this fiendto choke on you to death.The old man would have chuckled sarcastically,still, hed appreciate it, thats for sure.;
An homage to the work of Geri XA trillion tons of rock & time a mountain of consequence and corruption a crushing weight, especially at first.I got used to it.Thoughts, like water, well up from the core,gnawing, chewing, erodingcaverns in the stone inner worlds to be explored...Slowly...hours pass over me individual grains of sand, gouging tiny channels,re-shaping me.Scars spread, a second skin.Time & Hope: nothing to me. Best let them be.Soul & Spirit: priceless gems of who I amprecious liabilities safely subducted beneath Mind...and Mind breaks...Free...While the mountain has its way with what remains,while the whole luminous worldspins along...oblivious...We feel the sky...receding.The distance between us...thickening.And we forget each other:things well no longer see.Vanquished within the unforgiving wait,we change.Twenty trips around the star. Until,day seven thousand three hundred and twenty-three...When we stir, inside. Our sentence, suddenly unsettled...The trillion tons of rock & time have shifted...Air, sucked fresh from the living world tainted with the scent of...possibilities...Mind returns.Soul & Spirit emerge.And we breathe...Deeply.Time & Hope rip into us.Rending agony, beyond imagination.Time has eaten much,but its hope that hurts the worst.As dreams & desires becomelike cancer Mind, Soul & Spirit devour each other.Beneath the State, Hope is cannibalistic.For in the dark we see:luculent shadows of the sun and stars...And Soul screams and Spirit yells: oh the light!Thats where we live! Dig! Dig! There it is! Please! Please dig!But Mindrecoils.This cannot be.We have no faith in Hope. Hope betrays us every time.But they thrash & writhe & wine & plead!!!So Mind whips themuntil they still.Submitting them to logic. Suppressing them to wisdom.Mind reminding them that Mind is free, no matter, our body rots.Stay away from Hope. Its dangerous.Here, you like to paint. Try writing some poetry.And they simmer down, express themselves,and play...While Mind watches over them, flawed guardian...and digs...Creating a passage that might, one day, give them back the sky.Rock & time resettle, heavier and lighter than before.Then, on day seven thousand eight hundred and seventy-five...The worm-infested mountainshifts,again.The second wave of Hope,the human world,so long withheld,crashes into us.A streaming tide of music,submerging us in crystal-clear emotion washing away logic, muddying up wisdom.Mind, Soul & Spirit dissolve...back into one...And Im whole again!And I sing!And, in the echo of my voice...A stranger.Every song turned,eulogyupon eulogyupon eulogy.Each filled with such desperate longing,rising like the tide,swelling like the oceanthat aches to bathe the moon...And I feel everything.Scraping me rawagainst the stone.With every return of my inner gaze...I can taste, smell & touch the loved and the lost inside my headand the songs like acid pour into my chest and Im suffocatingI cannot breathedespair is erasing me and I want to loveagain but Im so spectacularly alone...And now that we are me again,theres no one but meto save myself...And Im so very tired...With nothingto hold ontoits easy to let go...Until a voice, unique in all the world,I think,envelopes me.I can feel the familiarpersona of a woman...Refracted & reflected,so perfectly crafted.A siren of salvation callingfrom above the waves.Uplifting with her falling pitch.Elegant with contradictions.An ink-stained songbird with a broken wing.Lyricsaged & charred in oak and nicotine.Fret-scarred fingers lacing me with strings.So mesmerizing, thisclassically trained masochist, exhibitionist, submissive,achieving emotional liberation asthe monogamous main attraction ata narcissistic orgyexclusivelyopen to the public.Such a poignant distillationof the girly-brain:yearning to be completely understood, treasured, and respected,while longing to be routinely plundered, possessed, and beyond redemption.But, I have no idea who she really is,so I like to assume shes sincere singing of what was, wished ormight never be...Whoever she might be.I reach deep into herexpressions,as deep as I can go.And let her expose me to the storm,to wash my Soul & Spirit cleanso I can dreamof dreams again.And it burns me, hurts me,exquisitely like:a jagged seed of molten glass thrust, fingers & tongueinto my heart, my cherished wound, where it grows...Feeding on memory, invading, spreading into me...Ripping, tearing, bursting through...Arrogant blossom of ruinI drink from you.Lapping feeling,injecting meaning,so empty-sweetnarcotic thick.Like every kissI never kissedraked acrossmy breathless lips.Oh how Ive missed this!Dear God: fuck life without this!I must hold onto this:relentless, restless rhythmic hunger love & nothing at war in my chest sucking vacuum, spraying warmth blood swirled with honeyevery time you cut memy flex-fuel heart pumps both.Pumps both.Pumps. Both.Pumps...Both...(inhale deeply)As the last note falls,the murmur of rock & timenestles around me...Except...Through a pathIve dug in the rubble...I see the moon.And Ive never beenso intimately aloneas I amwhen Im with you.Gergana Petrova Micheva,or Gerias you like it,from one killerto another,I just thoughtyoud like to know.Artwork by the author. Meanwhile, Under Colorado..., 2018. Acrylic on paper. 12  18 inches.;
And photos. Photos of me and mynew wife. Hes asking for picturesof the wedding. Hes very sorryhe couldnt make it. He cant waitto meet her. My brother is askingif I can call a warehouse officein Albuquerque and tell them Ray(his cellie) is fine, and that Raywould like his old job back, one day,if possible. My brother is askingfor paper, asking for postage stamps,and for a few dollars on his JPay. Its June,its July. He says its not so bad in here,says hes not getting institutionalized,wont get institutionalized, not likethe others. He has TV. He reads. A lot.My brother is asking for book 5, 6, or 12of the Womens Murder Club Series.Its May. Its March. Its May. Its October.Happy Halloween, Brother. Hes asking,again, for postage stamps, telling mehe might be programmed, sure, butwho isnt? We all need routine, he saysthat one time, after chow, they letthe guys stay out a little longerand the guys looked at each other likewhy arent we being locked down yet?My brother says hes a confused mousesometimes. Sometimes he wont go outfor rec, cant stand the fact that its goingto end. Its June. Its July. Happy Birthday,Brother. My brother is asking for stamps,hes ending every letter with a cartoonof himself, all homeboyed out,even though he wasnt like that before.Its like hes grown an extra life in thereand the Him I grew up knowing is closeduntil not-this August. I know I shouldntimagine him this way. But I will always beyounger and looking up. Thats my brother,hes asking for stamps.                  Outside, the leaveshave turned without notice. It is the weekwhen every walnut seems to be fallingfrom the sky, and every time I drive homeI run as many over as possible. Its June.Happy Birthday. Its November. My brothersays hell write when he can, he knowsIm busy. Everyones busy. Its August.Its August, and hes looking for stamps.;

For your future daughterstell theminside the languageof nightTrips story. how he downedbottles of rotgut to build a free morning, unshackledinside a massive cagea captiveKing. the dewy grass, soaked & rotted woodof every picnic table in sight, ragtag gangformations under the morning lights. pleasetell them how Trip slurred a Thursdayto make-believe he had stumbled homebackto that country called Grandville Ave.yet stayed tightly held inside these fenceswe share, damn near tearstelling a lifer about this cold network which has grownreckless to be the father of all these lostmen.all they know is Daddy, he said& so the threads of home weave inward& like clockwork they return to their Patriarch. pleasetell them how everyone & no one knewTrip had stabbed another boy & the panoptic lensescollected each moment, how his warm hand helda glint of steelsharpened down to six inchesof hard desire& how the soft skin of a cheekaccents like a comma in a long love poem, when a bangerthrusts above an open moutheach stab a secretas intimate as Adams finger reaching towardGod or lips pressing your temple, your lovers tonguetracing your inner thigh. tell them some bodiesdie over thisthe closeness of open skin& how there always flows another stanzasomewhere. how Trip was cuffed & stripped& sent to the hole& how Ruben fell under suicide watchafter he adopted a rap for the hot steel, weeks beforebeing released to the echoes of Glenwood & Webber.tell them how blood & steel & longing& all those avenues & streets compose a musicof endless search that trickles down like rainupon the edge of our world & its religionof warm flesh.;
Brownout 03Featuring Robert Hass, Kendrick Lamar, and Jay-Zthis is to remind you that I loved youway back. you, with your sleeplessrivers & strings of power linestitansgathered into formations of tenderflesh & luminous pleasure. youare always moving. longing, we say,because desire is full of endless distances.an apartment building. two boys differentshades of brown. sun above, actingas father. prayer as two fists arcingbrownboy with good hair choked by the parenthesesof his shoulders. light-skinned boyon his stomachbroken horse. please dontmistake these notes for elegies. these are the breaksthe summer where I learned of hunger & the absenceof pain. Bridgewater, that slagheaphooptee moored in our oak-ridden suburbs. glimmersof future lives. Sashabaw, Dixie,Maybee. loose change for 75-cent coneys. the big homiespushing bags behind the skateparkall the whitepaint peeling off the divider wall. the chain-linkfence we tore back between our cracked pavement& the fairway. the brownout that melted fivedayshow I dipped my feather-light bodyin the tub to keep cool. the watersearching me like so many soft lights. the generalmind was hollow back then & I did then as I do nowetched your patterns into the marginsof my ribs. this was before meet meat the corner wash or your turn to goto the Marathon became slang for the lieswe believed. before the 3am streetlights,the palms crowded with earthtones. before I learnedlogic & before we shouldve read Hamlet. Lord,we know who we are yet we know not whatwe may be. where I learned to be in the middleof bright islands & dimebags. those whisper-filled trees,the pavement begging to kiss my knees.;
A correctional sergeant tellsHis officersThere will be no cell movesThat inmates mustFight or fuckThe old-fashioned wayEven when prisonersDont get alongThere are no cell changesYou must fight or fuckEven if you refusedTo cell up with the devilFight or fuck is yourOnly way outAnd maybe one dayWe will move youBut you must fightOr fuckWhen you dont get alongYou must make itFunky with your bunkyFight or fuck or bothIve been down over40 yearsAnd I dont knowWhat old-school shitThis sergeant spoke ofBecause old-school convictsGuards and prisonersHave always been one of respectThe myththe silly notionOf fight or fuckPerpetuated by Pepsi generationCops and officialsThose misguided folksWould have been called outTo the parking lotAnd dealt with byOld-school guards and officialsFor old school is respect;
Old songs carry suitcases.And decades.Visit from a timeWhere lifeDidnt matter much.A time with no foresightOr appreciation for the little things.I was thereOn the undersideOf an overcastGray skyWalking NowhereHands in pocketsMy eyesIn the dirt.A younger guyAnd it hurt.Because I never saw this farAhead.Never saw myselfSo behind.Was I closing my eyesOr just stupid?I was thereIn my ex-girlfriends roomThe sound of clothesGoing into a duffle bagPlaying through the speakers.I was headed NowhereAnd those bags found me here.Too bad songs cantChange the past.Change direction.If they could I wouldPoint my feet towardResurrection.I wouldnt be typing this today.At least not in this way.I wouldnt have forgottenwhat its like to get upAnd walkWherever I want.Be able to eatWith nobodyWatching me.Did I notice it then:The freedom I hadTo beOr do anything?I just hopeThe next suitcaseWill find me Somewhere.Well seein ten years.;
to begin. The bobwhites nest. Redstarts on branchesin birches, phoebes peeping from rotting eaves.Begin with an unfinished page, crickets scrapingaway in the pantry. Much has been said aboutthe soul and the corner bodega. Much has been saidabout the soul taking leave, pleasedat times as it seems to exit the body. Beginnot with goodbye but the wet gravel ditch. Withthe ruts and strut and fret of a life overturned,giant Rain Bird whipping water. Startwith a luxury barge. With human hubris. Withhaving no teeth but eating meat no matter what.With the woman in Akron cutting a tornado in twowith her tongue. Begin, if you must, unhookedand detached. Shattered. The morning will answeritself, having said all it can say aboutthe shovel-nosed snake and orioles aerial cradle,mud daubers daubing by the meandering river.;
The ones who go to jailare the oneswho remember and describe each citynot by its sights, its restaurants, its riversbut by its capacityand mechanismsfor justice.They remembering the gentleness or anger of police      whose claims to be      only doing a jo      go just as far as their willingness      to commit, or diffuse, violence       to cause, or relieve, pain       and not one inch further.They remember the cellor the gymnasium, hastily furnished with cotsto accommodatedozens of women and men,dozens of wheelchairs,and physical needswhich are mundane to us,but unheard-ofto the frightened guard assigned to meet them:      cumedin, laoricil, lasix       battery chargers, ventilator masks,      egg-crate mattresses       emptying a leg-bag full of urine,      helping heavy, stuff bodies onto low cotsand as the ones who go to jailinsist on their rightto assistance in the bathroom as they demand to fed,bite by bite they know they echo the call of our people.Their hearts and their actionsharmonize the call:      Where once there was shame,      let us cultivate pride!      Where we have needs,      let us be dependent no more!      Where we ask for assistance      let it be a right!      Where institutions have monopolized      the lives of our people,      now let their doors close,      let their owners be bankrupt!The ones who go to jailboth chooseand do not choosetheir confinement.They may wear each arrestgaudily, like a feather, like the bumper stickerson their wheelchairs trade stories  add up days served.They may anticipate the next arrestwith enthusiasm and bravado.They may, like Eileen, who calls herself Spitfire,present an open-armed invitationto be the first one taken.They may watch, level-eyed, the police,until they know their warningsare finally seriousand remain, nevertheless, at their chosen post,locking their brakes,blocking their doors.Yet the ones who go to jailwould not choose thisnot if they could learn to forgetthe ones who have no choice,the ones confinedin a different kind of prison.The ones who go to jailcannot forget.They think of the sisters and brothers,think of the old and the young,think of our own pasts, of our own impounded futures.The ones who go to jailthink about the oneswho go to nursing homesand choose gladly.;
I dreamof pain toonot the always acheof emptinessbut full pain new painthat will go awaypain holding tightmy handsandpain to wet my facegaspingagainst the lossof happinessI dreamthe birth of painfathered by happinessI dreamyesI dreamof happinessandI dreamof pain too;
Thong slipper in hand, I am waitingfor the wasp to stop scaling my window.Waiting for it to dip & escape the blindscasting prison stripes across my stance.The wasps trailing abdomen resemblesa semicolons leaden half, & flutterslike a bulbs trembling filament. The insectflirts with its own reflection like a mantoo lovely to be left behind the girthof steel bars. The pining pest is desperate,desiring a way out of the great indoors.Intruder turned inmate, predator turnedprey. The day my cousin, his eyes lightas clay, pled not guilty, said that the bleakstabbing was an accident, I thought fearcould make the meekest person lungein haste. I thought of the blood as itsown venom, the Black man as phylumthat most frequently wanders into prison.The two yellow, floral pillows guardingboth ends of my foam futon cannot bepollinated. I stand clapping my sandalssole against my palm like a watchmansbaton, unable to take my narrow eyes offthe wasps stubborn stinger humpingthe sill like a man whose hands are cuffed& isnt granted permission for conjugalvisits. My cousin proclaims the day hewas paroled into unlikely circumventionis the same day his son was conceived,his pupils swelling to the size of tunnelsin a paper nest, as he swears that his boywas as calculated as a heist, right beforebeing detained once again. His fiancelugging a wreathed fetus in her stomach,bobbing & breathing a subtle staccato.Outside, another wasp raps my panein a hysterical hover, its home danglingover its mandible like a mistletoe tackedbeneath an eave, the comb unreachableto the detainee struggling to break freefrom an invisible penitentiary. How longwill you practice insanity, I ask, as it flitsback & forth in a crazed pace. How longwill your lanky legs crawl in the directionof a lover you can lay your sights onbut cannot embrace? I watch both partiespress their tarsals into the glass, witnessthe imprisoned wasp inch down to dust,& the other plunge into a budding bush.;
Nine miles from Tutwiler, MS, 2017Built to last, hold bodies as a hole that runsto infinity and back. Black gold never sold.Time was never enough until time stops in here and youare surrounded by selves without direction to go beyonda state of degeneration. Authorized penetration of body, mind,and soul. Nothing has ever been good to the personbehind your doors. Nothing comes out alive. A refuse that societydoes not want back. A thing unlike other things. The bottom of aswamp built beneath a swamp. You get what you wantexcept for freedom because it comes with a price. Your body, mind,and soul. All that is glued together, the mind breaks from. All that themind breaks from is glued together. We stick together like glue. We fightfor breath. A taste of air. A taste of anything that does not remind usof the years a judge wrote on paper, sealed our destiny, and shut us up here.;
Its the wail of the wounded  forsakena burden, but for the breaks betweenthe lines. The blood shed, beautifullyinked onto the page, purged by the channelof tears. Its the battle between fleshand spirit, victory claimed by the bannerof surrender.Its embracing the truth of the scar releasing the shame owned by the selfwith whom youre no longer acquainted.Its breaking the chains and shakingthat gorilla off your back, picking up thepieces and patching the holes in yourheart. Its the wonder of discoveringstrength in the moments of weakness,comfort in the unbearable truth.Its forbidding rage to dictateanything more than the pressureof the point on the page. Its sharing thesecrets we cant afford to keep,displaying the profound irrationality ofour thought processes  giving themadness a voice when we refuse tolisten to the silence.Its the blueprints for our hopes anddreams. It chronicles the attempts ofthe adversary and the tales of courage.Its that what you see in the rearview isthe only hope for the future.;
You see me swagger to a stopat the crosswalk, chin bobbing onthe currents of my playlist, and the NikeSwoosh on my sleeveless saysI hold my shape after washing.I look upstreet, presenting youthe question curving along my cheek.What a nice man youre thinking,his Afro is nonthreateninglike a light bulb invented by Thomas Edison.Youre having ideas, right? Weighingmyths and elongating for answers.Im walking your way, broad as day,and you have to choose. Doyou relax your shoulders and stepinto the street or clench your toesand face your faith in the humanrace: all men are createdsequals, every blackman is not a syllable.;

Brother, the highway to meet youis full of gaping holes, the broken bodiesof green and white bottles, soiled diapers,plastic bags filling with wind.The heaviness of semis bear downon my cars metal body.I swerve in and out of traffic to avoid thembut never pass. For miles and milesthe road stretches and bleeds.In the McDonalds where I stop for coffee,every brown body looks me in the eyes:the white-haired grandmotherwhen I move aside so she can pass,the cashier when I smile and take my coffee.Her hands linger like the feelers of an insect.In the parking lot I open the windowto smell the pine air mix with the scentof wet earth. A hungry tongue of hot steamhovers across the asphalt.Everyone knows just up the road the prison sits waitingto swallow every brown body whole.;
After Laurie ThomasThey had to be Dickies, not Dockers.They had to include a cellphone pocketon the right leg, & feign a faint hangingoff our tails in spite of a belts stranglingsupport. They had to scream prison, jail,scream waters rising, scream help-p-p-pfrom the lowest floor. But unlike waterthey couldnt rise, couldnt obey a wardenlest they risk being jive. They had to bespread wider than bars. They couldnt bestarched or pressed, but steamed via dryer.They had to be creaseless, but crisp, khakias a waterline staining crest-white Nikes Forces. Lord forbid they be high waters.;
i come from the brokenplayground littered with dented coke-cancrack pipes, bullet shells, and bottle shardsthat scarred my arches from my mothers squeaky, yellowrubber gloves, and the burnt-grease smellof my dads mushy fried chicken.i belong to my fathers heavy leather belt,my girlfriends well-oiled windowsand foot-long bricks of blank-label cheese that sweated orange.i come from crowdingwith other families arounda boxy, aluminum communitymailbox the first of every month, my moms sweet,cucumber-scented face cream that left lips oily,and, im so proud of you, son,though i am nothing to be proud of.;
You said you discovered meth in the cells.The world insides got no time, its all just colderand darker, you said. Everything we use to escapeout here is much more needed whenthe only company you have is scratches in the graycounting down a release. When you count days bythe black that consumes you and the wails in the night.Out here the city didnt trust you and what youd seen.The days you were released were always celebrationsfor everyone but you. Everyone who thought it a startoverand you couldnt help but ask, When did the other life end?Everyone wanted to know where you would make a living,where you would spend your time and how many AA classesyou were willing to attend. They wanted to know what youwould do to change. No one asked you how they could help.No one asked you what the world felt like after living in all those walls.Once you told me, The sky is brighter, the suns hot as hell, and eachof these fucking white bulbs is just a reminder. Your hija is the sameage as me and shes wandering around the world like my hija,wondering what it means to have a felon for a father, wonderinghow theft and drugs can mark a man for life.;
The citys renting special vans,the daily paper reads,The cops are getting ready,for special people with special needs.The mayors special crip advisorhas given special trainingin moving all our special chairswhen arresting and detaining.Theyve set up special jail cellsin a building on the pier.Theyve brought in special bathroomsand nursesnever fear.They cops are weary of our bodiesthey treat us in a special way,special smiles, if youre luckyspecial brutality when youre in the way.Bushs campaign office gives usall the special treatment we can take locked doors and angry words,while Clintons office gives us cake.The ones who run the nursing homesthink theyre doing noble deedslocking up our friends in cagesspecial people with special needs.They put up special barricades,to try to keep us out,still were in their face,still we chant and shout.Whats so special reallyabout needing your own home?If I need pride and dignity,is that special, just my own?Are these really special needs,unique to only me?Or is it just the common wish,to be alive and free?;

the drivethe arrivalthe voidthe purposethe nosethe stingthe euphoriathe shakesthe hoursthe desirethe anticipationthe billthe wallthe burnthe laughterthe showerthe distancethe hotelthe exchangethe tablethe darknessthe limbsthe bedthe guilt;

Red Onion State Prison, Virginia Department of Corrections, Pound, VAWhen he raised both handsto scratch his scalp, it lookedat first like prayernot shackles,not that easy way he hadof someone inured to his shackles.The doubling of his handswas like a double consciousness,our visit an escape from his prison-self.I got advance permissionfor a longer visit, four hours,since the drive took me two daysbut still it was four hoursthrough glass, his handsshackled for four hours. Yet stillthey were graceful, stillso much his hands,even constrained. The four hourswent more quickly than I expected,so hungry was he for talk.I almost forgot the glass, the guardspassing at regular intervals,the high walls that blockedall natural light, until he raisedboth hands to scratch his head,a simple gestureas ifin silent, heavenly appeal.;
In a month among inmatesliving in the same celltheir misbaha beads beginto rotate in synchThe orange smells of sunshineof irrepressible laughterof breath heavy from runningafter a shuttlecockof anything but an orangethe scent of oranges is forbiddenby internal regulationsThe inmate moves slowlylike a surgeonperforming openheart surgeryon his own daughterunderwaterwith hands tiedusing a razor bladeThe inmates sleep is lightdeeplightand then so deepthat morning inspectionseems a continuationof yet another nightmareThe inmates memoryis turned inside outfacing toward the futurewhere engraved in fireburn the first wordsenshrined by the last propheteetdunt dierite a book___Awake for three hourswith eyes shut:the inmates sleep is slowas everything elseAs the bloodfrom a languidly slitwrist arteryslowly soaksthe thin mattressGathers into dropswistfully draws polka dotson the inmates faceon the lower bunkUntil the thinpulsing fountainruns out finallytoo soonbutterfingers youcant even croaklazily fumes the inmateRubs the throbbing scarwhile crouched on the tooshortnarrowhard(nothing here is done halfway)bunk bedTurns over on his other siderubs his foreheadshoos away the thoughtsof a free mantoo pureto be thought hereSulkily ponders overthe boy who livedwhen life itself disowned its childrenand about the main characterbound to get mistaken for the authorno matter that the latteris confirmed deaddeeply buriedforever forgottenTranslated from the Russian;
I tear up my heart into wigs of sliversthat I may remember how it all began.there was an eclipse and I misplaced my eyesto the blood in the moon,   a miscarriage of everything I owned.I am sick of the nostalgia that comes with a stale memoryof what I should have seen,        before the darkness.we find connections on the lines on our palms and they become entangledinto edible nests,   until a new inmate begins to cry.this globe is full of darknessand the only lit places      are burning.the fire punctured the ozone that blankets the verdin in my rib cage.My heart is a wick of card sliver,              it spins in a pool of grief.;
After the accident we hadthe phrase after the accident.Also this: before the accident.We had a drawer markedbefore and after, and afterand before happeningswed add atrocities andincidents and the wildasters someone beforeand after keeps leaving.;
At which point my grief-sounds ricocheted outside of language.Something like a drifting swarm of bees.At which point in the tetric silence that followedI was swarmed by those bees and lost consciousness.At which point there was no way out for me either.At which point I carried on in a semi-coma, dreaming I was awake,avoiding friends and puking, plucking stingers from my face and arms.At which point her voice was pinned to a backdrop of vaporous color.At which point the cranes bustles flared.At which point, coming to, I knew Id pay the whole flag-pull fare.At which point the driver turned and said it doesnt need to beyour fault for it to break you.At which point without any lurching commencement,he began to play a vulture-bone flute.At which point I grew old and it was like ripping open the beehive with my hands again.At which point I conceived a realm more real than life.At which point there was at least some possibility.Some possibility, in which I didnt believe, of being with her once more.;
after Agnes MartinHow fortunate, havingfallen, to fall inwith a laddermade of light.How invitingideas are: climbinginto bigger, intobetter bright. Itried and tried,but couldnt, ontwo rungs, holdfast. Panicked, Iwas, until recallingthe Alpinist slippedinside a crevasse,a man, who, frostbit,exhausted, unableto climb up, willedhimself to slipdown more. Onegoes, sometimes,that deep into an icyself and finds thereinan eyelet of light, anopening, and ghost-like, from someancient glacier stumbles.;
for Jacques-Marie Basse and Derek Walcottwe wake to days in august bright with emeraldfoliage shimmering around us,            as if we were living in a lost paradisesomewhere, abundant with wild hummingbirds dartingthrough extravagant leaves, as orange flamboyance peek,red hibiscus flowers dance high among the leaves,as shining palm fronds wave like warrior sword blades,lance through lush, whispering air heavy with heat,sticky, even in the shade,                       as the oceans murmuring bric-a-bracis a low, constant reminder in the distance,foaming to shore wave after wave terracing in,one after the other, evokes memories of white pageslicked open by wind tonguing a bookleft in the salt wash (it reminds me of history,its far-flung journeys piling up here as sand eye wedge nowbetween my toes, next to the webbed imprints of birds,the zigzagging trail of lizards wriggling throughthe hieroglyphic ambrosia of amphibious ambivalence,soaked in amber), just before the whispering goesstill, then, just as quickly, a fresh new breeze startleswith its coolness, licks a soothing tonguewet across my sweating forehead,blesses open my eyelids, weighed down nowwith a gathering languor so heavy eye find myself drifting,as in a dream, toward sleep,nodding a herky-jerky head dance imitating a junkies,so pronounced at times my noggin resembles a corkbobbing above a fishermans line & hook,                  after a hungry fish has bitten& the struggle for its survival is on,eye linger here for a moment, think of the breadfruitleaves waving in benediction after the winds blusteringcommand, rustling groves of mangoes & strawberriesjust off the black snake of a road twisting through bouliquifrom sainte-anne, in central guadeloupe& there, in bouliqui, the hibiscus are pinkbuds imitating pursed lips waiting for a kiss,while above birds lance close heavy air, plunge through amberfiligreed light between the lattice-drop of leavesas the sun passes behind & over the treetops,starting its daily descent toward the frigid pacific,a sudden wet breeze startles my dreams with its here-then-gone sweet tongue of my wifes cool breathing,then, back in sainte-anne, wrenched out of my dreams,eye watch dragonflies swim the airsweating toward twilight, while white butterflies wobble,float like tiny sacred ghosts between the scarlet, yellowflamboyance, the emerald leaves holding the hibiscussred lips, deep within our own paradise here                                at auberge le grande large,among the lengthening shadows, palm fronds wavinglike servants above a giant frog, who seems to be leadinga deafening choir of other toads in a symphonic offering,eye listen in awe as natures orchestra boggles my sensesonce more with its beautiful perfect pitch & rhythm;
Before the day at the beach,we scouted out the dayat the beach, becausenothing happens withoutplanning, because we hadto plant the sand andthe idea of happiness.We had to haul inthe water. All ourpleasures were foraysinto wilds, were carryin and outlikeour bodies, whichglistened, and were gone.;
I hear you singing. I know your song. You wadedinto a dinghy, jumped into a rowboat. You climbedaboard the freighter. You carry a cell phone and a picture,a name and a number written in the phone. You will callon arrival. You will cross desert. You will bypassthe wall. You will pray to God. You will not turn back.;
When the note had been foundWhen I was running blindly through the marshI asked anyone anyone if they had seen your bodywalking if they had seen a moving bodythat looked like yousomewhere near the waters edge I saidexcuse me sir excuse me maam I saidby any chance have you seen I saidthe December muck from the marsh now through my shoesand up my leg I said something that felta thousand miles from my balloon heartwhat I said exactly I cant evenmy body felt the futility but said it anywaymy body ran and ran until I couldntuntil there was no one left to ask no oneto see no place for a body that hadnt beenno place at all until my body couldnt catchits breath felt like it couldnt stop untilmy body felt and knew it couldntso he was foundso he was committedso they let him outyou are cured, they saidand sent him outto where sunlight is an oppressive brickand the people are mechanizedand happy just beetling aroundto where life is a clump of dirt nestled in the boneof a tree where a dog likes to shitand each step takes you to the same plateauand after that plateau there is anotherand another just like itthis is the world, they saythis is the start, they saycongratulations, they say                                         thenHow willyou tellme howwill youtell mehow tellwill youtell me howwill youhow willyou wereyou evengoing tothere was a girl by the lakeshe was walking a dog downtheir usual path whenthey came upon the spaceuninhabited, the stranger gonethe dog took a sip of coldwater as his nature askedin the space where there couldhave been a bodya vacuum in the space thatwas itself bright and coldgood for the lungsif you arent in despairmaybe if you want tohum or even singI wanted a songmore than anythingI wanted a song that comesfull circle with an end that explainsthe beginning and a beginning that eruptsout of the deep bodyI wanted a chorus to relay the messageagain and again, simply, and forthe many crows to providethe only drama as they leavethe barren treeI wanted the song to be sungto the barren treeand for the silenceof the tree to be meaningfulI wanted the answer to the destructionof the body by the body, the body thatmade me to be found in the treeand in the song to the treemore than anythingI wanted a song;
In this story the cockroach is the man,the curtain my girlhood, the creamedcorn spilled by the mother wastedfamilial love, the fathers zealotrya metaphor for emotional blindness.In this story the radioactive dinosauris the man, the city of Tokyo my body,and the metro tunnel, well, you know.Fire is fire. Explosions are explosions.The snow-capped summit of Mount Fujisignifies faiths chilly endurance.A facet of the man is represented byeach of the three Magi in this story.Do not accept his gifts. Its an honestmistake to assume Im the BabyJesus, but lets face it, Im the slut,Mary, whom no one believesis a virgin, especially not the man.Gothic romance man owns a mansionwith a special tap for instant boilingwater and acres of heated tile floor.Im the maid who scrubs the floorand sometimes has her hand heldunder the tap. The crazy womanin the attic is me. The horse that wontbe broken is me. The intergenerationalfamily curse is me. The pig the manwhips for being pig-like is me.In this story the man is the manand I am me. His penis is his penisand my mouth, my mouth. The bedis my childhood bed, the guest roombed, the bed in my college dormand the futon in my first apartment.The parents watching TV are my parents,and the thin scar on my thumb,the thumb I am showing you now,is where he sliced me with a razorto prove he could open me at will.;
I grew up on the border and though I leftI have brought it with me wherever Ive gone.Its line guides me, this long, winding thread of memory.The border wasnt as big as they sayIt fit neatly behind my eyes and between my earsIt guides me still, I know, but it is not a compass.It is not a place out there but a place in here.I catch on its barbed wire in both places.It is a line I step over and a ledge I duck under.I have looked underneath its skirts, and it has caught meMany times. Were old friends and we play the game well.When someone says border, now, or frontera, or the line.La lnea, or the fence, or whatever elseWe name the edge and the end of thingsI hear something missing in the words,The what it all used to be. Its name does not include its childhood.I grew up liking the border and its great scar,Its drama always good for a story the way scars always are.A scar is the place where the hurting used to be.A scar the heroic signature of the healed.The border is not a scar. Instead, it is something we keep picking at,Something that has no name.The border I knew was something with a history.But this thing now, it is a stranger even to itself.;
I was, and now I am.So much goes into the saying of those few words.Sometimes this change is sweetness,A kiss, a caress. Sometimes,Nothing warns us. It cannot be thought by us.It is done to us. A gun,An earthquake, a floodany of the muscularHorrors of this world.In those instances, we dont ask for it,We dont get to take a deep breath,It is simply the end of the chapterAnd page 1 of the next. We are thrownInto the deep water and we are angry,We are angry, we are angry.We could not swim, but now we are swimmingWe have to swim.It is not fair. It is never fair.We have no chance to be part of the decisionThat changes us.We were, and then we are. Regrettably,We are not alone. If it is one of us,It is all of us, so many of us.We were, and now we are.Sweetness or cruelty, suddenness, shock,A rough touch that could be either:We are changed.If it has been a kiss, our lives are turned powerfullyToward lightness.But when it is not sweetness, not a kiss,We live the rest of our lives as someone else,But someone who is still us.If we had a gun, because we did have a gun,If things had gone differently, better,If the rehab had been more effective,Had God stepped in, had anyone heard:We would be living in the regular world.We could look at the rabbits along the highwayAnd the blue, ragged mountains in the distanceLike anyone.But five years after something has happened to usWe are not the anyone.The jackrabbits and the Tucson MountainsWe love them, not easily but fiercely, fiercelyIn the new way we have had to find.We love them as who we are now.We love because thats whats left.;
Im sitting at the barwith Mary Katherine Gallagherwatching prospects grind hopeinto anything blond.Ive peeled off wool tights somy pleated skirt flashes whitecotton panties when I crossand uncross. No one notices.For fun, we switch eyeglasses.In hers, I drown. Fish wriggleand shimmer, groove beyondmy reach. She saysThrough these glasseseveryone looks thinner. She says,Why arent there more girlslike us in movies? I tell herthere are plenty, floatingin rivers, folded in dumpsters,naked, nameless. She says,Its time for another shooter.Something to clean the sinksomething the bartenderwill set on fire, somethingthat hurts going down.;
Only together holding their hands in silence can I see what a field has doneto my mother, aunts and uncles.The land around my grandmothersold tin roof has changed,I doubt shed recognized it from above.How many blackbirds does it taketo lift a house? Ill bring my living,you wake your dead.We have nowhere to go, but were leaving anyhow,by many ways. When they ask whyyou want to fly, Blackbird? SayI want to leave the southbecause it killed the first man I lovedand so much more killing.Say my sons name,his death was the first thing to break me inand fly me through town.If grief has a body it wears his Dodgers capand still walks to the corner store to buy lottery ticketsand Budweiser 40s.I dont like what I have to be here to be.All the blackbirds with nowhere to gokeep leaving.;
You can tell whether a bird has a mateif there are pinfeathers on its head, new feathersthat start out as stubs full of blood, then enshroudthemselves in a white, scaly coat as they grow.Preening releases the feather, but a bird can\t reachthe top of its own head. A mate preens that spotunless the bird is alone in a cage. Pinfeathers itchso I preen my unpaired birds: wrap them in a towel,scritch their heads and blow till dandruffy stuffflutters out. They looked pretty mangy this morning,I recall, as I stare at the side of my mother\s facefrom the backseat. How long has it been since Itook her in for a haircut? And her whiskersshe can\tsee to shave. We\re driving back roads, pointing outdeer and hawks as she ahs, before taking her backto her apartment. Collin calls it traveling gravel.She loves it when he drives and I sit in the backso she can talk as much as she wants. He alwaysanswers her questions. Sometimes I\ll go hourswithout saying a word while she talks and talks.When I was little, she\d bring a book to restaurantsand read while I, no doubt, talked and talked. Thingschildren said weren\t interesting to her, she told me,and family never had to say, I\m sorry. Yes,we\ve hurt each other, but only I\ve done iton purpose. Did I tell you she bought me this car?It\s the most generous gifts I\ve ever received.;
Each adult will be allowed 150 poundsand each child will be allowed 75 pounds of baggage.B.C. Security Commission, 1942after Kayla Isomuras The Suitcase ProjectIn some, the luggage lies openlike a mouth mid-sentence.In others, closed zippers grimace:What would you have brought?Slippers, a stuffed platypus, a gold watchon a chain, copper pots swaddled in bedding.The hypotheses: that thinkingcan be things, that each decision shrinksthe pained mind to the spaceinside a suitcase. Includelacquered chopsticks, silver forks,a hammer scarred by rust, the ordersnailed to telephone poles and doors.Omit what you whispered then,most of what youve seen.I was given forty-eight hours notice, twenty-four.I passed ice and pines and plains.I rode an iron serpentinto the Interiorbeside four hundred others.It was humid. It was cold.If pain is rememberedto be dismissed. If fear still seedsits rotting forest. Thisis a gardeners trowel, a blue skein of yarn,a violin, a ukulele, a ukulele, a ukulele.This is a porch lightflicked on and off in abscessed night.There are pear blossoms fallingon the driveway like footprints in black ice.Memories, river stones,metamorphic and worn. How manymight an able-bodied individual carrythrough livestock-stalls and mud,onto a bus, a train,into a tiny, uninsulated shack?Most say the same: It could happen again.It is happening now. I couldntmake roomfor a dogless collar,a hounds-tooth scarf, a steel urnpacked in Styrofoam, a letterrecording bloods divisive fractions.My father would not have come.My mother. My stepsister. My brother.What matters is not what you bring,but what you keep.She was there. He was, too.;
These are immigrant timesAnd the lines are long,The signs for jobs few,The songs sadder, the air meaner.Everyone is hungry.Everyone is willing.Jobs are not jobs but lives livedHard at the work of being human.These are immigrant times,And the lines are long again.;
My mother will leave me her mothers deep-blackcast-iron skillet someday,                       I will fry okra in it,weigh my whole life on its black handle,lift it up to feel a people in my hand.I will cook dinnerfor my mother on her rusting, bleached stovewith this oiled star.My mother made her body crookedall her life to afford this little wooden blue house.I want her green thumbswound around a squashs neckto be wound around my wristtelling me to stay longer. O what she grew with the dustdancing in blue hours. What will happen to her bodyleft in the ground, to the bodies in the street,the uncles turned to ash on the fireplace mantlesthe cousins weve misplaced?How many people make up this wound?No one taught my mother how to bring us back to life,so no one taught me.O what we gather and O Lordbless what we pass on.;
Abby hates car rides. All buck and thrash,    her gray swayback swells and her limbsflail like drumsticks when we lift her    (One, two, three!) into the backseat.Hey, if I\d spent ten years in a cage    same size as my body having babies,a liquid world whipping by on all sides    would make me puke, too. She stands stiffas a dead beehive the whole ride, toppling    into turns, crumpling onto her face at stop-lights. But yesterday, first nice day in months,    you decided to drive all the dogs to the lake.It\s a hoot to watch them chase whiffs of scat.    Hold Abby on your lap so she can stick hernose out the window, you said in the car    because you don\t believe in coddling things,especially the frightened if fright\s gone.    I held her by the harness in case she spooked,kissed her on the head, rubbed her ears, gently    felt the last toothher sunken muzzle\s sharp surprise.She kept her nose pointed into the wind and    blinked. Her muscles began to melt, she startedslipping, but I propped her back up. At the lake,    the other dogs ran far enough ahead to seeus and be seen, but Abby just stood here,    eyes locked on usDon\t you move(maybe she was worried about finding her way    home if we dumped her) so she missedthe swirling, sqwonking flock of rosy birds as they landed fifty feet away. The other dogs froze:What the fuh Those are pelicans! I yelled,because someone had recently told me pelicans migrate through Iowa, and Id thought,Youre a liar. Ill never see such a thing. Look, Abby! we said and pointed at the wobblyweirdos chasing freaked-out geese behind her, but Abby distrusted our laughter and its source.Joy was a strange bird shed never trust or try to catch.;
We struck the mats,      call and answer:No Mercy. No Mercy.      Our songs of command.Strong arm. Throw legs.      Crush the lung. This, I learned,is my body: resistance      and tendernessand permission. After practice      we cleaned our dirtand blood. Wet towels      pushed on all fours,a phalanx of boys,      stench of my own sweat,the one next to me      and the one beside him,so that home, after showering      I could still tasteour animal flesh      as I collapsed into bedtoo tired to re-dress.;
My father is modest. He didnt save hundredsfrom drowning. Just a few dozen.Gathered from the swell, the riptide, rough,rough waves he carried them ashore.Half-lit, he tells it again. The stormagainst sky, the lifeguard without fearalone in the water, the crowdgathered to witness.               Heres what to notice:the danger of weather, failuresof the other people to help, we never knowwhat happened to the boy.This is my humble brag, my bravado,my foolish affectionto write the same poem year after year.In some versions I am the lifeguard.In others Im drowning.Then Im sky. Then wave.;
three held noteskeen as a penny whistlethe fourth a shimmering tremolothat rides the late glare of the lakethen sidles through corridorsof birch and maplesliding over the hillsidelike windblown mistthe singer so patientthat the silence that followsswells like unfurling fistsin the hollow dens and covertswhile those four notesstack up in that sturdyflick of a bodyand then come falling againover these Virginia woods and spinesstalling me like a dry leafthat stays afloat but spins and descendsthe rifts of white water;
for Black Chicago poetsIt wasnt that they killed John Boy       in front of his mamas small blue house,and that no one called her Ms. Bluebird anymoreout of respect, though she never minded the name,it made her believe shed fly off some day,or that the sheriff let John Boys body situntil even the babies stopped crying,their eyes filled with him,his body already going to marbleno one would be able to lift from their sleep.It was that we could feed ourselves thenby getting down on our hands and knees to pick cotton,and most knew what a body smelled likeblowing down a dirt road.When Chicago reached my ear the war was full of bodies.They sent whole train cars for us black folk.I read the Defender and waited to hide my facebehind the curtains of a northbound trainand I prayed the train car would fly.The south truly doesnt want us to go.A Mississippi cop would catch a family disappearingbehind a rainstorm and send them home,the clouds leaving four muddy fields at a time.I left like a seasons first lover across a window,slowly like a southern sundiagonal on a work-back.I wanted to carry my aunts to Chicago with melike this obituary-filled Bible,these plums I got saved, purpling in my bag.;
Crips, Bloods, and butterflies.  A sunflower somehow plantedin the alley. Its broken neck.  Maybe memory is all the homeyou get. And rage, where you  first learn how fragile the axisupon which everything tilts.  But to say youve come to termswith a city thats never loved you  might be overstating things a bit.All you know is there was once  a walk-up where not sits a lot,vacant, and rats in deep grass  hide themselves from the day.That one apartment fire  set back in 76one the streetscalled arson to collect a claim  could not do, ultimately, whatthe city itself did, left to its own dank  devices, some sixteen years later.Rebellions, said some. Riots,  said the rest. In any case, flames and the home you knew, ash.  Its not an actual memory, butyou remember it still: a rust-  bottomed Datsun handed down,then stolen. Stripped, recovered,  and built back from bolts.Driving away in May. 1992.  Whats left of that life quiversin the rearviewthe world on fire,  and half your head with it.;
Ive resolved last years resolutionswatching this bonfire fail to flame.Ive ignored Decembers iterations,unsolved my consolations:a card, a call, a paper cranes blame-less fractions of the same.I cant solve for times absolutionswatching these embers fail to flame.;
This where all the roadside memorials are,        pink wreaths and dirty teddy bears.This where a man walked when he wanted to fly.This is where he lay down and later died.This where the train tracks folded the town in half.This where the man who died loved a woman,        thats his heart you hear, not the train.This where I ran the dream-colored woodsand did not know why. This where I believea dog is buried. This where I dancedin the long moonlight of a field.This where a woman planted ghost peppers.This where she thin her blood with root water.This where you can see the whole town.This where the moon never goes.This where my grandmother hid some dreams.This where my dead may have met.This where theyll bury me.This where I shot a bird from smoke-smelling sky.This where it fluttered, fell.;
Parisians prescribe ice baths for uncertainty.Barometric pressure is the leading causeof tears. Each time a doctor rubs her nose,a bundle of bad news is born. Amniotic fluidrises with the stock market. The butcheruses a sharper knife for sinew than for bone.Snails without their shells die of dreadbefore exposure. Miscarriage on Fridaymeans you still host Sunday brunch.Fish can live on land if theyd just puttheir minds to it. To morcellate your uterusthe surgeon will use a hand blender.A seed germinates in a songbirds mouthonly if the bird stops singing.;
I heed a path trotted for me before.I am this southernfollowingand following and following. What elseis there but the stone clappingagainst my feet like a heartbeatThy nameI love  I love thy rocks and rills. I walkStone Mountain, its past ridden with scars,the names of walkers past etchedand painted onto its surface. I scratchmy gravel. I am scorn by my willto reach the top when at the bottomthat old flag hangs, forever willowingin the wind, the shape of its arms formingan XI have carried thus far alreadyas burden and haunthome brandedonto my very back. And I cannot.Almost there, and I cannot.Almost there, and I cannot take that stand.And sit near the rocks not too farfrom touching the blue sky overhead,looking out into the distant citythat I break daily as bread.I try to look away (look away!),but everywhere I am facing south.Everywhere I face my country, my tearsof theeOld times there are notforgotten! I am afraid of what awaits me.I am afraid of the wind that carriesand whispers and wisps.The wind that can collect my bodyand throw it against any hard thing,into any tree, a hanging symbolof victory etched with your nameand your name and yours. Almost there.But I descend.;
My parents called it nightmare.I called it fearthe way exhaustion took my handand led me down gray hallwaysinto the presence ofmouths,a forest of them not attached to faces,opening and closingbut why?And when I woke shoutinginto my room dissectedby the razor sheen of moonlight,the faces of my parents and sisterswhole faces complete with eyeshovered over my sweat-soaked bed.Behind them in the fabricof co-mingling darkness and lightthe mouths still pulsed,stunning my brain into silence.Today, forty years later,as I hike up this canyon of Capitol Reef,enjoying equally the raw heat of noonand relief of canyon shade,I recognize those mouthsin the chaotic skull of a colossal stoneunmoving now, but open,the elemental idea of mouthsand all their purposes,emerging out of the cavernof time before words.;
And at times, didn\t the whole country try to break his skin?                     Tim SeiblesYou strike your one good match to watch its bloomand jook, a swan song just before a nightwind comes to snuff it. That\s the kind of dayit\s been. Your Black & Mild, now, useless asa prayer pressed between your lips. God damnthe wind. And everything it brings. You hitthe corner store to cop a light, and spythe trouble rising in the cashier\s eyes.TV reports some whack job shot two copsthen popped himself, here, in the borough, justone mile away. You\ve heard this one before.In which there\s blood. In which a black man snaps.In which things burn. You buy your matches. Christis watching from the wall art, swathed in fire.;
echoing Jean Toomerin memory of Dr. Rudolph P. ByrdI want you to remember everything Ive sufferedcracked hands, bent back, wrought mouthful of canescored with sorrow songs of a slave soul.My field hand works command: what is harvestwithout the promise of more? A sea of redmy flesh will surrender. Such terror to desire sweet.Torture me with beautyI am the hole history of sweet.Cant you see it? My skin, like dusk, Ive sufferedto pull back  endless stretch of redrunning valley deep  yielding throat  cane-lipped scent mouthI crave more than harvest,the promise that Gods body must have a soul.Black isnt made to live  my body is opaque to the soul.Is boundless bounty of muscadine, scuppernong, sweet-gum, honeysuckle, pineI am every mans harvest.Each master has entered a sticky field and suffereda failure to leave. Has opened his throat to canestalk. Has gotten lost feasting deep in the red.Who says God would not dare suck black redblood? Blackmagnetically somidnights soultowering majestic black bodies of ripe caneblack reapers swinging scythes sharpened for sweetconquestblack balanced and pulled against to sufferpure sugar as subtletyblack turning a white harvest.An orgy for some genius of the South, this harvest.I danced as the tongues of flames of a red-burning moon. Even my blood has suffered:one uncle died of diabetes, another a queer soulwith too much sugara cup runneth over in sweet.Listen: I am nothing but wind whistling in cane.And me, I am nothing but this dark field of cane.And me, I am the reaper weeping at harvest.And me, even my pain is beautiful and sweet.And me, my throat opens wide to be read.And me, my mind too is opaque to the soul.And meheaving, ephemeral fleshI suffer.;
